The Project Gutenberg EBook of Autobiography of Miss Cornelia Knight, lady
companion to the Princess Charlotte of Wale, by Ellis Cornelia Knight

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Autobiography of Miss Cornelia Knight, lady companion to the Princess Charlotte of Wales, Volume 2 (of 2)
       with extracts from her journals and anecdote books

Author: Ellis Cornelia Knight

Editor: John William Kaye

Release Date: December 28, 2018 [EBook #58557]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MISS CORNELIA KNIGHT, VOL 2 ***




Produced by MWS, Barry Abrahamsen and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)









                     AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MISS KNIGHT.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             AUTOBIOGRAPHY
                                   OF
                         MISS CORNELIA KNIGHT,
                                 Vol II

                         LADY COMPANION TO THE

                      PRINCESS CHARLOTTE OF WALES.


          WITH EXTRACTS FROM HER JOURNALS AND ANECDOTE BOOKS.


                            IN TWO VOLUMES.

                                VOL. II.



                                LONDON:
               W. H. ALLEN AND CO., 7, LEADENHALL STREET.
                               MDCCCLXI.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          CONTENTS TO VOL. II.

                                -------


                               CHAPTER I.

        Miss Knight’s Narrative of Events attending the        1
          Rupture of the Orange-Marriage—Dismissal of the
          Household of the Princess Charlotte—Letter to
          the Regent—Miss Knight’s Pension


                              CHAPTER II.

        The Princess’s Birthday—Suspected Intrigues—Letter    26
          to the Queen—The Year 1815—Journal continued


                              CHAPTER III.

        Preparations for War—The Queen’s Levee—Treatment      52
          of the Princess Charlotte—Napoleon and the
          Bourbons—Rumours from the Seat of War—The Battle
          of Waterloo


                              CHAPTER IV.

        Rejoicings for Waterloo—The Marriage of the Duke      71
          of Cumberland—Prince Leopold—Marriage
          Rumours—Marriage of the Princess Charlotte—How
          it was brought about—Later Revelations—Character
          of the Princess Charlotte


                               CHAPTER V.

        France revisited—Chantilly—Parisian Society—The       92
          Court of the Bourbons—The Prince de
          Condé—Marshal Marmont—The French
          Stage—Invitation from the Princess Charlotte


                              CHAPTER VI.

        Return to England—Meeting with the Princess          111
          Charlotte—France under the Bourbons—Parisian
          Society


                              CHAPTER VII.

        Society in Paris—Journey to Homburg—The Landgrave    133
          and the Landgravine—the Dowager Queen of
          Würtemberg—Christmas at Louisburg


                             CHAPTER VIII.

        Departure from Louisburg—Paris—Coronation of         148
          Charles X.—London—The Princess Charlotte’s
          Monument—Anecdotes of Charles X.—Return to
          Germany


                              CHAPTER IX.

        Paris and London—Death of the Queen-Dowager of       165
          Würtemberg—Homburg—The Landgrave and
          Landgravine—Life at a German Court—Return to
          Louisburg—Baden


                               CHAPTER X.

        Genoa—The Pallavicini Family—Character of the        183
          Genoese—Return to England—The Royal Family at
          Brighton—London—Gloomy Retrospect.—Anecdotes


                              CHAPTER XI.

        Anecdotes—Talleyrand—Charles                         202
          Albert—Masséna—Ferdinand of Spain—Lord
          Wellesley—Alfieri—Charles X.—Death of Miss
          Knight

                                -------




                 EXTRACTS FROM MISS KNIGHT’S JOURNALS.

                      ROME AND NAPLES, 1781–1798.

        Consecration of a Catholic Bishop—The Grand-Duke     214
          Paul of Russia—Princess Dashkoff—Père
          Jacquier—Joseph II. of Austria—Gustavus of
          Sweden—Alfieri—The Countess of Albany—The
          Piozzis—General Acton—Arrival of Admiral Nelson

                          WINDSOR, 1805—1812.

        Miss Knight’s Settlement at Windsor—Gaieties at      260
          Court—Lord St. Vincent—Rejoicings at
          Windsor—Death of Princess Amelia—State of the
          King’s Health—Princess Amelia’s Funeral—Progress
          of the King’s Malady–The Regency Act—Conduct of
          the Regent

                                -------

               EXTRACTS FROM MISS KNIGHT’S ANECDOTE BOOKS.


        James Boswell—Madame Piozzi—Lord Nelson—The Queen    285
          of Naples—Sir Thomas Troubridge—The Bronté
          Estate—Admiral Barrington—Cardinal de
          Bernis—Italian Anecdotes—The Princess
          Dashkoff—Louis Philippe—The Emperor Joseph
          II.—Miss Knight’s last Records—Her Religious
          Faith


                                -------

                               APPENDIX.


        Exclusion of the Princess of Wales from the          343
          Queen’s Drawing-Room

        Death of the Princess Charlotte                      349

        Footnotes                                            351


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                     AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MISS KNIGHT.

                                -------




                               CHAPTER I.

MISS KNIGHT’S NARRATIVE OF EVENTS ATTENDING THE RUPTURE OF THE
  ORANGE-MARRIAGE—DISMISSAL OF THE HOUSEHOLD OF THE PRINCESS
  CHARLOTTE—LETTER TO THE REGENT—MISS KNIGHT’S PENSION.


[THE following additional narrative of the transactions related at the
close of the first volume, was drawn up by Miss Knight for the perusal
of a female friend:]

Princess Charlotte having had a long discussion with respect to
residence in Holland, of which all the papers were preserved by her
Royal Highness, it was at length granted by the Regent’s confidential
servants that an article should be inserted in the marriage contract to
prevent her being taken or kept out of England against her own consent
and that of the Regent—at least, this was the meaning of the words.

The Prince of Orange had always appeared to prefer an establishment in
England to one in Holland, and had always said that when his father’s
consent to the insertion of such an article came, he would look out for
a house, and take one, in case one was not provided by Government.

This consent came, and the article was prepared; but the Regent wished
Princess Charlotte even then to waive it as a compliment to the House of
Orange, but her Royal Highness persisted in claiming the article. Nearly
a fortnight passed after everything appeared to be arranged, and her
Royal Highness, seeing the Prince of Orange daily in presence of Miss
Knight, often asked him what preparations were making with respect to a
house, establishment, &c. He always answered that nothing had been said
to him, appeared to be ignorant, and did not then talk of taking a house
himself.

While the Prince of Orange was at Oxford, a letter came from one of
Princess Charlotte’s aunts, who is very intimate with the Regent, to say
that she understood he meant, as soon as the Emperor and King of Prussia
were gone, to write over for the Oranges and have the marriage
celebrated as soon as possible. This alarmed Princess Charlotte, and she
said she resolved to enter into a clear explanation with the young
Prince to avoid disputes afterwards.

The morning after he returned from Oxford this explanation took place,
and it appeared evident to Miss K., who was present, that they thought
it could not go on; that the duties of the Prince of Orange called him
to Holland, and Princess Charlotte’s to remain in England, and that
neither of them chose to give way; that in that respect the affair stood
nearly as at the setting out in December, and that no preparations were
made for a residence in England. They, however, parted, agreeing to
think it over till night, when Princess Charlotte promised to write to
the Prince of Orange. No letter came from him during this interval, and
about eleven at night her Royal Highness wrote him a letter breaking off
the marriage, and desiring he would inform the Regent of it. This letter
went on Thursday (I think the 16th of June); all Friday no answer. On
Saturday her Royal Highness received a note from a friend who had been
dancing at a ball the night before with the Prince of Orange, and who
said he had told her he had not informed the Regent of the breaking off
the marriage, and did not intend to inform him. Princess Charlotte
immediately wrote an affectionate and respectful letter to her father
telling him this circumstance, and her horror at the delay. About three
came the answer from the Prince of Orange, which was literally as
follows, her Royal Highness having allowed me to copy it:

                                      8, Clifford-street, June 18, 1814.

    I found the night before last your letter, and have lost no time to
    acquaint my family with its contents, but I cannot comply with your
    wish by doing the same with regard to the Regent, finding it much
    more natural that you should do it yourself; and it is, besides,
    much too delicate a matter for me to say anything to him on the
    subject. Hoping that you shall never feel any cause to repent of the
    step you have taken, I remain,

            Yours sincerely,

          (Signed) WILLIAM,

              Hereditary Prince of Orange.

Her Royal Highness sent the original of this letter to the Regent, with
the copy of a note she ordered Miss Knight to write that day, after the
receipt of his letter to the Prince of Orange, to ask for her portrait
and letters. The portrait and some of the letters were a little while
after sent back to Miss Knight by the Prince’s aide-de-camp, and the
packet of letters sealed by the same.

Some time elapsed, and no further notice was taken; no communication
from Carlton House (except a short note on the 18th from the Prince to
Princess Charlotte expressing his concern), no visit from any of the
family. The Duchess of Leeds sent in her resignation.

In the beginning of July the Bishop of Salisbury had a conference with
Princess Charlotte, which she mentioned to Miss Knight, who was not
present at it. Her Royal Highness said it was to induce her to write a
submissive letter to the Regent expressing her concern for having
offended him, and holding out the hope that in three or four months she
might be induced to renew the treaty with the Prince of Orange. Her
Royal Highness added, that the Bishop had said, if she did not write
this letter, arrangements very disagreeable to herself would take place.

Miss Knight wrote to the Bishop desiring to know what these arrangements
were, saying, as she wished nothing more than a reconciliation between
Princess Charlotte and her father, she begged to know what arguments she
might use to enforce the step he dictated, only observing she did not
flatter him with a hope that Princess Charlotte would marry the Prince
of Orange, or any one who had a right to sovereignty.

Of the Bishop’s answer the following is an extract:

[N.B.—The Bishop was at the time in the habit of seeing the Chancellor,
and, I believe, also Lord Liverpool.]

“Having heard from three different quarters that the Regent was most
severely wounded and deeply afflicted by his daughter’s conduct, and
that an arrangement was making for the Princess Charlotte which might
not be according to her wishes; having also a hint given to me that
probably a dutiful, respectful, and affectionate letter from the
daughter to the father might soften the Prince’s mind, and tend to
lessen the rigour of any measure he might have in contemplation, I felt
it incumbent on me to state all this to the Princess, and I did most
strenuously recommend to her Royal Highness to write such a letter. I
did also go further, and ventured to tell her, that as the intended
match with the Prince of Orange had been so highly acceptable, and so
much desired by the whole nation, so the breaking it off had been the
cause of universal regret and displeasure. I told her, also, that there
was still a sanguine hope entertained that her Royal Highness might see
her objections in a different point of view, and that when the affairs
of Holland were completely settled, and its Prince had his time more at
his own command, that then her Royal Highness might be induced to change
her opinion, and give herself to the wishes of her father and her
country.

“With respect to the arrangement, which I understand is at this time in
contemplation, I know nothing but that an arrangement is making,” &c.
&c.

About this time Baillie, Clive, and Keate had given a paper expressing
their advice that her Royal Highness should go to the sea-side for two
or three months in the autumn. Princess Charlotte therefore wrote to
request this favour of her father, and at the same time expressed the
most poignant grief for his displeasure, and the most anxious wish to be
restored to his favour. This letter was sent on the 9th. Various rumours
in the mean while reached Warwick House of new ladies, amongst whom Lady
Ilchester and Mrs. Campbell, being appointed, of confinement at Carlton
House, &c. &c.

The Prince of Saxe-Coburg had never been but once at Warwick House,
where he stayed about half an hour or three-quarters, in presence of the
Duchess of Leeds, Miss K., and Miss Mercer Elphinstone. Princess
Charlotte had received him civilly, but rather coldly. He had sometimes
rode near her carriage; but her Royal Highness in general avoided
speaking to him, and only once exchanged a few words in the Park. She
never expressed the slightest partiality for him, but, on the contrary,
her displeasure, when one of her most intimate friends (Miss M. E.)
talked of him. She often expressed her astonishment that he should know
so much of her affairs as her friend said he did, for that he had talked
of Miss K. being sent away, and of a corner being fitted up at Carlton
House for her Royal Highness.

About the same time it was reported that this Prince saw the Princess
Charlotte often, and had drunk tea at Warwick House; himself told the
friend of Princess Charlotte that he had been severely lectured by the
Regent on the subject. These reports made Miss K. uneasy, and she
mentioned them as false to Lady Bathurst. She also wrote a letter to
contradict them, which she was about to send to the Regent, when on
Monday, the 11th, the Bishop came in the evening, and said he was to be
in attendance to go to Carlton House, and that something was to be done.
Her Royal Highness Princess Charlotte and Miss K. talked to him, and
said everything they could to induce him to mitigate the anger of the
Regent, and to explain any circumstances which had been misrepresented.
He went, and was long closeted with the Regent or his Ministers. At
length he came, and said the communication was to be made at five, but
he was not at liberty to mention _what_. Soon after a message came from
the Regent to order her Royal Highness and Miss K. to go over. Princess
Charlotte was so wretched and so ill that she could not go. Miss K. went
and made her apology, taking this opportunity to confute the scandal
respecting the Prince of Saxe-Coburg, when the Regent said that was
perfectly cleared up, that the young man was honourable, and had written
him a letter explaining everything. He then ordered that Princess
Charlotte should come the next day if she was well enough, or Dr.
Baillie to say she could not.

The following day, 12th of July, her Royal Highness wrote a note to the
Regent, saying she was so distressed and unwell, that she begged he
would excuse her coming, but, as she wished much to see him, that he
would come to her.

The Regent sent his love, and said he would come after the levee. He
came about six, attended by the Bishop, whom he left below, and came
into the drawing-room, desiring Miss Knight to leave him alone with
Princess Charlotte. He was shut up with her for about three-quarters of
an hour, after which the Bishop was called up, and remained with them
about a quarter more. The door then opened, and Princess Charlotte came
out in an agony of grief, telling Miss Knight, who followed her into her
dressing-room, that “all was over; she was to be dismissed, the servants
to be turned off, the new ladies in possession of the house, herself to
go over to Carlton House, or, if not well enough that day, the next (and
in the mean while the Regent and the ladies to sleep in the house) and
to be shut up for five days at Carlton House, after which to be taken to
Cranbourne Lodge, and remain there for some time without seeing anybody
but the Queen once a week.” Miss Knight begged she would compose
herself, and go over quietly. She fell on her knees, and, in the
greatest agitation, exclaimed, “God Almighty grant me patience!” Miss
Knight, she said, must go immediately to the Regent; which she did, and
he communicated to her the same intentions Princess Charlotte had just
related, adding that he was sorry to put a lady to inconvenience, but
that he wanted her room that night. Miss Knight begged to know in what
she had offended, but the Regent answered he made no complaints, and
should make none. He, however, said he believed many things were done in
the house without her knowledge, which she denied. When she came out, to
her great dismay Princess Charlotte had disappeared. She searched for
her everywhere, and at length Miss Mercer (who was changing her dress in
Princess Charlotte’s bedroom adjoining) came and begged to see the
Regent. She told him her suspicions that Princess Charlotte might be
gone to her mother, and offered to go with the Bishop to persuade her to
come back. Miss Knight went afterwards, and then returned to Carlton
House and asked to see the Regent, but was shown into a room where the
Chancellor and Lord Ellenborough were.

                  *       *       *       *       *

    You will feel that all I have written is in great measure
    confidential, though the strictest truth. The letter of the Prince
    of Orange, in particular, I would not wish to make any improper use
    of; but happening to have it, I copied it, as a proof of what I had
    asserted. I join a copy of my letter to the Prince Regent, which has
    not been answered.

    It would have been a great blessing if we had been living at Carlton
    House for the last year and a half. I wished nothing so much as that
    the Regent and his daughter should be much together, which, alas!
    was not the case, for his health or business prevented his coming to
    Warwick House, where he was only four times since the 10th of
    December, and Princess Charlotte was only sent for when the Queen
    and Princesses were in town; besides, nothing was communicated to
    her until it was settled. In that it was not like _one_ family.

    I know she would have been most happy to have been on more intimate
    terms with her father, and he always assured me of his affection for
    her. It seemed as if some malignant power kept them asunder, when
    their real happiness and interest demanded their having confidence
    in each other.

    I mean no complaint against the Regent. I was much hurt when he
    dismissed me, and felt angry; for which reason I made apologies in
    my letter, though I am not conscious of having said or done anything
    to offend him. I had no authority to keep away visitors he did not
    like, and in one instance, when he gave an absolute _command_, the
    lady never came again. The few who did come were certainly all women
    of character.

    I hear it now reported that Princess Charlotte has been sometimes
    _seen_ alone in her carriage, which is a decided falsehood.

    I know, my dear Miss L., I can trust your discretion; and the high
    opinion my old friend, Lord St. Vincent, has of Lord Ellenborough,
    assures me I may trust to his.

    You will have the goodness to return me these papers at your
    leisure. I called yesterday, but did not find you at home. Excuse
    all this trouble, and believe me,

            My dear Miss L.,

                Very sincerely yours,

                    E. C. KNIGHT.

    Friday, 5th August, 1814.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The paragraphs which appeared on this occasion in all the Government
papers, and the reports circulated, were most injurious to Princess
Charlotte and to me. I therefore thought it my duty to remain in town to
hear and to contradict all this nonsense.

           MISS KNIGHT TO THE RIGHT REV. BISHOP OF SALISBURY.

                                    9, Little Stanhope-street, May Fair.

    MY DEAR LORD,—Have the goodness to look over the paragraph I have
    marked in to-day’s _Morning Post_.[1] It evidently alludes to
    yourself and to me, as I was the only person living in Warwick
    House, and the only one dismissed. I am sure you will not hesitate
    to contradict it as far as this goes, and trust also that you will
    state whether the Prince Regent did not repeatedly say that he had
    no complaint to make of me, and that he would make none.

    I must request you also, in my own vindication, to state whether you
    discovered me to be a person “possessing pernicious sentiments,
    alike hostile to the peace of the daughter, the father, and the
    country.” It is impossible for me not to anticipate your
    contradiction of this base insinuation, when I remember the
    assurances I received from your Lordship, so late as Monday last,
    that you had zealously, though ineffectually, endeavoured to change
    his Royal Highness the Prince Regent’s resolution of removing me
    from my attendance on Princess Charlotte.

            Believe me, my dear Lord,

                Your faithful, humble servant,

                    E. C. KNIGHT.

A few days afterwards Princess Charlotte went to Cranbourne Lodge; the
Princess of Wales asked permission to visit her; but was answered that
her daughter should pass a day with her to take leave of her before she
went to Worthing.

This took place;[2] and Princess Charlotte, as I heard, went to
Connaught-place, attended by Lady Ilchester, and Lady Rosslyn, and
General Garth, who was also appointed to be of her suite. Before they
parted, the Princess of Wales asked Princess Charlotte whether there was
any chance of her renewing the treaty of marriage with the Prince of
Orange, and she positively declared she never would. The Bishop, Dr.
Short, Mr. S——, and Mr. K—— attended as usual; had houses at Windsor,
and went to Cranbourne Lodge in the evening.

The Princess of Wales invited me to dine with her before she left town,
which I respectfully declined, but called to take leave. She seemed
agitated, had just had leeches applied to her temples, and asked me
whether the report of Princess Charlotte having gone out in the carriage
alone were true. I contradicted it positively, wondering how such a
silly report could have gained ground for a moment. I then read her the
following letter, which I had just written to the Prince in
justification of Princess Charlotte and myself:

                   MISS KNIGHT TO THE PRINCE REGENT.

    SIR,—As a subject, and one who had the honour of being admitted into
    your Royal Highness’s family, I consider it a sacred duty to express
    the grief I feel for having incurred your displeasure.

    Your Royal Highness will do me the justice to allow that I was
    actuated by no ambitious views, but by loyalty and attachment, when
    I accepted the employment which has been the source of my
    degradation. I have no near connections left to plead my cause. My
    sole protection must be derived from the honourable feelings of your
    Royal Highness. I am not disposed to seek it from the influence of
    patronage, and still less from the clamours of faction.

    Your Royal Highness was graciously pleased to promise me, through
    Lord Moira, that you would support me in every difficulty, and never
    give me up. These claims (from accusations to me unknown) your Royal
    Highness may think I have forfeited. I will therefore only venture
    to enforce them so far as to solicit your attention to a few words
    in my justification. Indeed, I need not enforce them. As a good and
    just Prince, your Royal Highness will listen to the vindication of
    an individual who appeals to no other tribunal.

    Anxious as I was to evince my dutiful attachment to your Royal
    Highness and to Princess Charlotte, permit me to say that I could
    not have accepted the employment offered me if I could have foreseen
    that I was to be the constant and sole inmate of Warwick House. I
    concluded that the responsibility must almost wholly devolve on the
    lady who was appointed governess, and that my intended colleague and
    myself as “Ladies Companions to Princess Charlotte,” the title
    specified when I came into office, were only to share the duty of
    attending on her Royal Highness, and to cultivate what was ever my
    most anxious wish—the greatest harmony between her Royal Highness
    and every branch of the Royal Family.

    No colleague was appointed, and circumstances, no doubt unforeseen
    by your Royal Highness, rendered my situation very different from
    what I had expected, but they could not change the nature of my
    employment, nor invest me with a character, against which your Royal
    Highness will recollect my remonstrating when the papers erroneously
    styled me sub-governess.

    All this gave me pain, but did not alter my sentiments. I felt the
    delicacy of my situation, and I devoted myself entirely to the
    duties which had fallen to my lot. I gave up all society, and nearly
    all intercourse with my friends. I can solemnly declare that I never
    left Warwick House but to attend her Royal Highness, unless the
    Duchess of Leeds was there, and even then so rarely, that I do not
    believe I made six visits in the space of a year and a half.

    For many weeks last winter a violent cough and almost constant fever
    could not induce me to remain one day in my room. I never went to
    rest until Princess Charlotte had retired to her chamber, and I
    always rose before her Royal Highness, availing myself of this short
    interval to see any one with whom I had business.

    Princess Charlotte never went out unattended by the Duchess of Leeds
    or myself (a circumstance so obvious that I should not mention it,
    if I had not accidentally heard that the contrary had been
    reported). The carriage was never ordered without my knowledge, and
    visitors were announced to the Duchess or to me.

    No gentlemen were in the habit of visiting her Royal Highness, nor
    was she left alone, or expressed a wish to that effect, even with
    her masters.

    If I have erred, it has been against my intention, and without my
    knowledge. I have no acquaintance, nor have I had any communication
    with persons of seditious principles, improper conduct, or
    sentiments hostile to your Royal Highness. I trusted the whole tenor
    of my life would have exempted me from the suspicion. I can only say
    that I have done my duty to the best of my power, and I can safely
    aver that, during my attendance on Princess Charlotte, not only her
    Royal Highness’s conduct, in the usual sense of the word, has been
    blameless, but her time usefully employed in the cultivation of her
    talents.

    My devoted attachment to Princess Charlotte will not be considered
    as a crime by your Royal Highness, who was generously pleased, on
    account of that very attachment, and of her condescension in wishing
    it, to place me about her; but after it had been the pleasure of
    your Royal Highness to dismiss me, I could not wish Princess
    Charlotte to urge my stay. God forbid that I should become a source
    of controversy between your Royal Highness and Princess Charlotte!
    May you rather be united and happy when I am forgotten!

    I only beg for the restoration of your Royal Highness’s favour,
    which may put an end to the injurious suspicions so sudden a
    dismissal may have raised against me; and if, when struck to the
    heart by the accumulated anguish of sustaining the weight of your
    Royal Highness’s displeasure, the pang of parting from my beloved
    mistress, and the obloquy of being discarded from her service, any
    expression may have escaped me which might offend your Royal
    Highness, or appear inconsistent with my dutiful and loyal
    attachment, I humbly entreat your Royal Highness’s forgiveness.

                                 I am, Sir,
                      With the most profound respect,
                Your Royal Highness’s most dutiful servant,

                                                           C. E. KNIGHT.

    July 24, 1814.

Lady C. Lindsay told me that Mr. Brougham said, when he was obliged to
tell Princess Charlotte that she could not in law refuse going to her
father, he was so shocked at the manner in which she received this
account, that it appeared to him like pronouncing sentence of death on a
criminal. The Princess of Wales asked me whether Princess Charlotte was
attached to any one of the foreign Princes who had been in England, for
that if she was, she (the Princess of Wales) would move heaven and earth
to get him for her. I answered that I believed her Royal Highness’s
principal wish was to be left quiet on subjects of that nature, at least
for many months; and the Princess said that was all she could get out of
Princess Charlotte.

Mr. Canning was announced, and ordered to be shown up-stairs. I took my
leave. It is certain that on the fatal evening in Connaught-place it
struck me that the Princess of Wales was more anxious for the removal of
Princess Charlotte out of her house than the Prince was to get her into
his. She departed next day for Worthing.[3] Soon afterwards we heard
that she had asked and obtained leave for going abroad; and it was said
Mr. Canning had persuaded her. It is certain that she had for several
months formed the plan, which Princess Charlotte had opposed in the most
urgent and respectful manner.

I sent my letter to the Prince, and heard it was delivered, but received
no answer. I had, during our last interview, asked his leave to visit
Princess Charlotte, which he had refused, saying she was to receive no
visits. I then had asked permission to write to her, and his answer was,
“better not at present.”

I went to Twickenham, where I passed a few weeks with Lord and Lady
Aylesbury. Time passed, and Princess Charlotte remained at Cranbourne
Lodge till the _Morning Chronicle_[4] published the medical report given
in July, recommending her going to the sea. This occasioned great anger,
and Baillie was ordered to inquire, in a manner the most inquisitorial,
who had obtained and caused this to be published. Amongst the rest I was
questioned by letter, and answered that the copy I possessed I gave to
the Regent on the 12th of July, and had no means of discovering how it
got into the hands of the editor of a newspaper.

                      DR. BAILLIE TO MISS KNIGHT.

    DEAR MADAM,—I am very sorry to give you any trouble at present, but
    I am commanded by high authority to ask you the following questions:

    Do you know by what individual the medical opinion recommending a
    residence on the sea-coast this autumn to Princess Charlotte was put
    into the hands of Mr. Perry, the editor of the _Morning Chronicle_?

    Do you know whether the original opinion, which was at one time
    mislaid or lost, was ever recovered, and, in that case, what became
    of it?

    I request that you will be so good as to send me an answer to these
    two questions as early as you can, directed to me at Sunning Hill,
    Berks.

                              I remain, Madam,
                     Your most obedient humble servant,

                                                             M. BAILLIE.

    Sunning Hill, Berks, Sept. 1, 1814.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                      MISS KNIGHT TO DR. BAILLIE.

                            Lord Aylesbury’s, Twickenham, Sept. 3, 1814.

    DEAR SIR,—No apology is necessary for the questions you ask, as I am
    happy at all times to obey the commands referred to in your letter,
    which reached me last night after post time.

    I neither know nor can discover through what channel the editor of a
    newspaper obtained a copy of the medical opinion recommending the
    sea-side to her Royal Highness the Princess Charlotte.

    That which was in my possession I delivered to the Prince Regent on
    Tuesday, the 12th of July.

    This is all the information I can give on the subject, and no one
    could be more surprised than myself when I heard it had found its
    way into the _Morning Chronicle_.

            Believe me, dear Sir,

                Sincerely yours,

                    E. C. KNIGHT.

However, Princess Charlotte was sent to Weymouth,[5] and the air was of
great use to her general health as well as to her knee. She formed an
acquaintance with the Lady Grenvilles, daughters of Lord Warwick, and
was allowed to see Lord and Lady Ashbrook,[6] who went there on her
account, though on pretence of a tour. She was more comfortable there
than she had been at Cranbourne Lodge, to which place she did not return
until the winter was advanced; but since she has been there the family,
and the Queen in particular, have been more kind to her than they ever
before were.

I have since passed much of my time at Rochetts, Lord St. Vincent’s, who
is as much alive to all this at eighty as if he were only thirty-five.

When I found no payment of salary was made me in October, I wrote to
Lord Liverpool, and the Prince ordered 300_l._ a year should be paid me
from the Civil List as a compensation for having left the Queen’s
service to attend on Princess Charlotte. To the servants, wages and
board wages have been granted.

                  *       *       *       *       *

           [The following is the correspondence referred to:]

                     MISS KNIGHT TO LORD LIVERPOOL.

    MY LORD,—When, by the special desire of the Prince Regent, I left
    her Majesty’s service for that of Princess Charlotte, his Royal
    Highness was graciously pleased to promise (through the medium of
    the Earl of Moira) that I should never be a sufferer by the change.

    I therefore take the liberty of requesting that your Lordship will
    lay before the Prince my humble petition for the continuation of my
    salary; and I am so fully convinced of the humanity, liberality, and
    justice of his Royal Highness, that I am confident he will not
    refuse me a provision, which I really would not claim were it not
    essential to my subsistence in the station of life which Providence
    has assigned me.

                          I have the honour to be,
                                  My Lord,

                     Your Lordship’s obedient servant,

                                                           E. C. KNIGHT.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                     LORD LIVERPOOL TO MISS KNIGHT.

    Lord Liverpool presents his compliments to Miss Knight, and begs to
    acknowledge the receipt of her letter to him of yesterday’s date.
    Lord Liverpool will not fail to lay it before the Prince Regent when
    his Royal Highness returns to town.

    Fife House, November 1, 1814.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                    MISS KNIGHT TO LORD ST. VINCENT.

                                                   Saturday, December 3.

    MY DEAR LORD,—I am just returned from Fife House, whither I went by
    appointment at twelve. I said that my first motive was to thank his
    Lordship for his obliging attention to my request in laying my
    letter before the Prince Regent, and my next to show him a letter
    from Lord Moira, which I had preserved, as, although it contained no
    specific promises, it implied _much_. He read it attentively, and I
    then showed him that from Sir H. Halford, with the intention of
    giving me the rank of Honourable, and the certainty of my remaining
    in the family, &c. He read that also attentively. I added that I had
    several letters from the Princesses to the same effect, if not still
    more explicit, but that I considered _them_ as _sacred_. He was
    silent for a little while, and then said the Prince had directed
    that what I had from the Queen should be given to me; that he had
    laid my letters before his Royal Highness, and had no further power.
    I answered that I should not dispute with my Sovereign, nor refuse
    whatever he chose to give me, but that it was _not_ a compensation
    for what I left, as, besides the salary, I had apartments and other
    advantages adequate at least to the 500_l._ I received at Warwick
    House. I subjoined that I had hoped his Royal Highness would have
    continued my salary, as, when he dismissed me, he said he did not
    complain of anything; since which, however, I had written him a
    letter in my justification, which, not being answered, I concluded
    there was no complaint to make. Lord L. bowed assent. I then said I
    neither wished to trouble his Lordship nor to refuse the pension,
    but was anxious to put him in the possession of facts. He said the
    pension was clear of all expenses but the property tax, and inquired
    what was the time of my last payment of salary. I said the 5th of
    July, and that I was dismissed on the 12th. He could not exactly
    tell, he said, when the pension might begin, as it depended on what
    money was in the Exchequer. I rose to wish him a good morning. He
    asked if I had a carriage, and I hoped Lady Liverpool was well. So
    we parted.

    I am glad I saw him, as I think my visit has answered two purposes;
    one, to solicit _accusation_, or at least to prove to him, as I had
    before done to the Chancellor and Lord Ellenborough, that I had
    urged the Prince Regent to make complaints, if any were to be made,
    and none were; secondly, that I have made known, though
    respectfully, to the Prince Regent my dissatisfaction as to what is
    called remuneration or compensation, which leaves my claim open for
    future times if I live to want an addition to my income.

    Pray tell Miss Brenton that I have called in Bryanstone-street, and
    saw Lady Brenton, but Sir Jahleel was in his bed. Many thanks for
    your Lordship’s letter, and the enclosure from Lady Jane Loftus, who
    has at length given me her Dublin direction. I saw Prince
    Castelcicala this morning; he augurs well of Naples.

                Ever, my dear Lord,

            Your much obliged and affectionate,

                                                           E. C. KNIGHT.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                     MISS KNIGHT TO LORD LIVERPOOL.

    Miss Knight presents her compliments and thanks to Lord Liverpool
    for his obliging notes. She is just returned to town, and requests
    his Lordship will allow her to see him for a few minutes at any time
    he will have the goodness to appoint for her calling. 9, Little
    Stanhope-street, May Fair,

    Thursday, Dec. 1, 1814.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                     LORD LIVERPOOL TO MISS KNIGHT.

    Lord Liverpool presents his compliments to Miss Knight, and will be
    glad to receive her at twelve o’clock to-morrow.

    Fife House, Friday, December 2.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                     MR. WILLIMOTT TO MISS KNIGHT.

                                           Fife House, December 9, 1814.

    MY DEAR MADAM,—Lord Liverpool has desired me to inquire whether you
    would wish your pension warrant to be made out in the name of _two
    trustees_, or merely in your own name; and also whether you would
    like to have the following words inserted—viz. “_for her sole and
    separate use_.”

    As soon as you can favour me with an answer to the above queries,
    Lord Liverpool will direct the warrant to be prepared.

            I have the honour to be,

                My dear Madam,

                    Your sincere humble servant,

                                                           R. WILLIMOTT.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                     MISS KNIGHT TO MR. WILLIMOTT.

                                    9, Little Stanhope-street, May Fair,
                                                  Monday, Dec. 12, 1814.

    DEAR SIR,—I beg you will return my best thanks to Lord Liverpool for
    his very obliging attention as to the mode in which the warrant for
    my pension should be made out. Indeed, I am fully sensible of his
    Lordship’s readiness to oblige throughout the whole, and I am
    convinced that after the explanation I had with him, if he can
    obtain for me the whole of my salary (500_l._ a year) he will,
    although I am too dutifully attached to the Prince Regent to murmur
    at whatever he thinks proper to grant.

    I do not see any necessity for trustees, or even for the insertion
    “sole and separate use,” though the latter may be more regular.

            Believe me, dear Sir,

                Very sincerely yours,

                                                           E. C. KNIGHT.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                    LORD ST. VINCENT TO MISS KNIGHT.

    MY DEAR MADAM,—Thanks for the relation of what passed at the Fife
    House interview, which was most ably and honestly conducted on your
    part, and unless the specific sum of 300_l._ per annum was expressed
    by the Regent, Lord L. ought to, and I hope will, bring the case
    again before his Royal Highness. I return your letter because the
    statement it contains, taken down the moment of your return home,
    may be profitably referred to on some future occasion.

    My cough is so incessant I can only add how truly I am

            Your affectionate,

                ST. VINCENT. Rochetts, December 4, 1814.

    I rejoice in every event which contributes to the gratification of
    Prince Castelcicala. Miss Brenton is very sensible of your kind
    attention to her brother and sister; she and Thomas Parker send you
    their best wishes.

                                                                 ST. VT.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER II.

THE PRINCESS’S BIRTHDAY—SUSPECTED INTRIGUES—LETTER TO THE QUEEN—THE YEAR
  1815—JOURNAL CONTINUED.


ON Princess Charlotte’s birthday, 7th January, 1815, I wrote to Princess
Mary,[7] enclosing a few lines for Princess Charlotte, merely to express
my sentiments on the day. Princess Mary answered that the Prince had
desired that his sisters should not deliver any letter or message to his
daughter, but that when she had an opportunity she would ask his leave.
I have heard nothing more of it, and I am now writing on the 24th
February. Miss Mercer Elphinstone has been allowed to visit Princess
Charlotte since her return from Cranbourne, and is in constant and
undisturbed correspondence with her. I am told she continues to be very
intimate with the Russian Ambassadress, Madame de Lieven,[8] and most
people think the latter a great intriguante, whether truly or not I
cannot say. Miss M. is also accused by many of playing a double part. I
believe her to be desirous of governing Princess Charlotte without a
rival, but I cannot think she would deal treacherously by her, though
she may not be aware of the use made of her by her uncle, Mr. Adam, who
is the Prince’s Chancellor for the Duchy of Cornwall, and is supposed to
be devoted to the Duke of York. Miss Mercer is in her politics strongly
attached to the Opposition, and very intimate with many of them. The
motion made by the Duke of Sussex (or rather, I should say, announced,
for by the advice of Lord Grey he withdrew it), relative to an inquiry
into the measures pursued with respect to Princess Charlotte, was
disapproved by many of the Opposition[9] as well as Ministers, but His
Royal Highness gives as a reason for it, his wish to clear his
character. It is supposed that Mr. Brougham was sent to meet Lord Grey
on the road to persuade him to give the advice he did to the Duke of
Sussex. All this involves matters in much mystery, and naturally raises
suspicion in the minds of many; but it is to be remembered that Miss
Mercer is an heiress, and very clever, and will, therefore, always
excite jealousy. Time alone can show what her real intentions are, and
consequently what her real conduct has been.

Lady Downshire, whose intimacy with the Prince Regent ceased when he
left his old associates for the present Ministry, has been particularly
kind to me since I left Warwick House, and very anxious about Princess
Charlotte. Another affair has interested her warmly, the dismissal of
twenty-five officers of the Prince’s own regiment of Hussars (the 10th),
for their complaint against Colonel Quentin. Lord Arthur Hill being one
of these, it was natural that his mother should feel it acutely, and
Colonel Palmer (who was obliged to be the prosecutor, and who had
already suffered great anxiety on account of his father’s affair, which
the Regent first patronised warmly, and afterwards opposed) is not only
her friend, but also a protégé of Lord St. Vincent and Lord Moira.

Peace with America (at least, the preliminaries) was signed at Ghent in
the beginning of January, I think, and there was much talk of a change
of Ministers. I came to Rochetts on the 23rd January, and soon after
heard of Colonel Quentin challenging Colonel Palmer at Paris. The
friends of the latter had heard of this intention some time before he
did, as he was gone to Bordeaux to see an estate he had bought in that
neighbourhood, and they advised Colonel Palmer not to accept the
challenge. However, he did, but would not cock his pistol till Quentin
had fired at him and missed, when he did, and fired it into the air.
After his return he went and spent a day and night at Rochetts.
Parliament met on the 9th February, but the Prince did not arrive till
the Monday following.

I wrote to inquire about the time of payment of my pension, when I heard
of it from Lord Liverpool the last time I was at Rochetts. I was advised
by Lord St. Vincent to explain to Lord Liverpool how inadequate it was
as a compensation to what I had with the Queen, as, besides the 300_l._
a year, I had apartments, &c. I saw Lord Liverpool on this subject, and
showed him letters which contained great promises: but nothing more was
done, and I am tired of the subject, being at the same time truly
thankful to Providence that I am in the situation in which I am. I have
received for answer to my last inquiries, that it is dated 28th October,
and that the first quarter will not be paid for some time.

Princess Charlotte finds means of writing to me when she can; and her
letters are always kind and confidential, but we are obliged to keep
this correspondence secret.

Lord St. Vincent, though kindly anxious to keep me here, is of opinion
that when I go to town I ought to go to the drawing-room, and mix in
society as much as possible, that I may not have the appearance of
shunning public observation. The very kind attentions of all my friends,
and of many who were before only common acquaintance, facilitate this
plan; and I have also received the most friendly invitations from my
friends in France, and very gracious messages from the Duchess
d’Angoulême.

[In consequence of this suggestion, the following letter was addressed
to Queen Charlotte:]

                       MISS KNIGHT TO THE QUEEN.

                                                        4th March, 1815.

    MADAM,—Since I had the misfortune of losing your Majesty’s favour,
    it has been my earnest wish not to increase the displeasure I
    incurred. I therefore take the liberty of once more addressing your
    Majesty, as I am greatly embarrassed on a point which no other human
    being can settle agreeably to my feelings.

    I understand your Majesty intends holding a drawing-room next
    Thursday,[10] and respect as well as inclination prompt me to appear
    at it; but I know not whether this would be construed as an act of
    respect or of presumption. Rather than incur the suspicion of the
    latter, I am willing to relinquish an intention, which, in the
    opinion of all my friends, I ought to fulfil; rather than offend
    your Majesty, I would abstain from it at the risk of satisfying the
    malevolent, who might attribute my absence to a consciousness of not
    having done my duty at Warwick House, although, in answer to my
    urgent solicitation on the subject, the Prince Regent, when he
    dismissed me, never brought forward any accusation; and although my
    own conscience acquits me of all design or even thought incompatible
    with my dutiful respect for his Royal Highness. This my friends
    feel, and it is one of the reasons why they wish me to appear; but
    the attachment I must ever feel for your Majesty will not allow me
    to intrude myself into your Majesty’s presence without knowing that
    I am right in so doing.

    I do not presume to expect an answer; but, should your Majesty,
    unfortunately for me, disapprove my joining the crowd to pay my
    respects, I humbly entreat Madame Beckersdorff may be allowed to
    inform me.

                                                                E. C. K.

[The following extracts from Miss Knight’s journals continue the record
of the eventful year 1815:]

Feb. 27th.—Returned to town from Rochetts. The weather beautiful. On the
way saw the walls in various places chalked with invectives against the
Corn Bill.[11]

Received a letter from ——,[12] contradicting the reports in the _Morning
Chronicle_ respecting his supposed marriage. It came enclosed in one to
the Duke of Sussex, which he sent me to read, and it was to the same
effect, declaring the story to be absolutely false, and without
foundation.

I went at half-past three to Lady Downshire’s, where I met the Duke,
and heard that the Princess of Wales had written to Lord Liverpool to
ask for a frigate to bring her home, but had been refused by the
Prince, saying there were none disposable.[13] Dined at Prince
Castelcicala’s.[14] At ten he and his youngest son set off for Paris,
whither he is ordered to go on an important mission for his own Court.

28th.—Saw Dr. Baird and Mrs. Balfour, who was an intimate friend of poor
Lady Day. Afterwards walked to Weymouth-street, to inquire after Mrs. C.
B. Egerton’s little girl, who is dangerously ill; only saw the General.
Called on Miss Mercer Elphinstone, who said she had been at Cranbourne,
and that Princess Charlotte was to come to the drawing-room on the 9th,
but that she had been suffering with bad headaches.

March 1st.—I called in the evening on Lady Aylesbury, Lady Neave, &c.
The people are discontented with the Corn Bill, and write horrid things
on the wall, such as “Bread or blood,” “More Bellinghams,” “Bread, or
else the Regent’s head.” It is, however, said, and I believe with truth,
that the Regent is against the bill. There was a sort of riot yesterday
in the Borough,[15] and the Horse Guards were sent to quell it. I dined
with Princess Castelcicala, and met Count Woronzow there in the evening.
He said Lord Castlereagh would be at Paris on the 3rd.

In the evening I went to Lady Charleville’s, where two Spaniards, one
named Rosquillos, and Naldi’s daughter sang. There was a large party,
though, I believe, not what is called large in London. Very good
company. Mrs. Perceval,[16] now Lady Carr, was there, looking gay and
handsome, and followed by some of her daughters.

Thursday and Friday I spent chiefly with poor Mrs. C. B. Egerton, whose
little girl died this week, and on the second of those days I heard from
Princess Charlotte, who informed me of Cranbourne Lodge having been
given to her “en propriété,” and of the intention of Ministers to give
her 8000_l._ a year on the Civil List, for her Windsor expenses and
“menus plaisirs,” at her own disposal. She believes she is to come to
town for a day or two whenever anything is going forward, and to be on
those occasions at Carlton House until Warwick House is converted into a
wing of that building. She mentions the Queen being gracious, and even
affectionate to her, and says her Majesty has in a late transaction
stood forward fairly and humanely as her friend. She complains of
headaches, but says she occupies herself as much as possible to abstract
her mind from its cares. Her letter is expressive of much considerate
tenderness towards me, and some of her friends and dependents.

I called and left a box of trinkets (belonging to her Royal Highness,
which was in my possession) at Miss Mercer Elphinstone’s, who had given
me a message from Princess Charlotte to desire I would send it by her.
The drawing-room was announced for the 9th, but it is postponed,
probably on account of the discontent of the people with respect to the
Corn Bill.[17]

The Duke of Sussex sent me word that he had a message from Princess
Charlotte, to say that she had been desired by her father to write to
her mother that she would never see her more, but had declined it. It is
said the Princess of Wales will return in May.

March 4th.—I made several visits in the evening, and heard much of the
discontent about the price of bread. I also heard that the paper sent to
Congress by the Prince of Benevento (Talleyrand), was the best state
paper which had been seen for ages. It has restored great part of Saxony
to the King of that country, and it is thought may have a good effect
with respect to the recovery of the kingdom of Naples, two hundred
thousand men restlessly anxious to be employed on any service forming
the great argument which France can easily urge. In the evening I went
to Mrs. Egerton’s, to a party at Lady Neave’s (which she gave in honour
of the return of Lady Sarah and Mr. Lyttleton), and to Lady Downshire’s
box at the Opera, just in time for the ballet “Le Prince
Troubadour.”[18] The dancers are said not to be better than figurantes
at Paris, but Mademoiselle Mélanie is certainly graceful in many of her
attitudes, and Madame Leon is a pretty little figure. Vestris, father
and son, are of the number.

5th.—I dined at Lady Downshire’s, and Lord and Lady Aylesbury came in
the evening. I heard that Lord Proby intends to move for the reformation
of courts-martial. Lord Castlereagh arrived yesterday from Vienna _viâ_
Paris. The discontent about the Corn Bill continues.

6th.—I walked out in the evening, but heard nothing particular. I dined
with Miss Tisdall[19] and her brother, and passed the evening with Lady
Aylesbury, where I heard much, as I had likewise at dinner, of the mob,
which had been attacking houses[20] in different parts of the town, on
account of the Corn Bill. A loaf steeped in blood had been placed on
Carlton wall. The Horse Guards were out all day. I heard from Mr. ——,
who has lately returned from Brussels, that the Flemings by no means
like the Dutch—rather despise them; that the nobility and commonalty are
for their old government, and the middle class for the French; that the
Prince of the Netherlands has only been able to get together an army of
five thousand Dutch, and must trust entirely to English and Hanoverians,
who, in fact, command the country; that the only thing which reconciles
the Flemings to the business is the prospect of having a Court of their
own, and that they are, therefore, still looking forward to the marriage
of the Princess Charlotte. The Sovereign, they hear, is to divide his
time between the Hague and Brussels, and the Hereditary Prince to live
constantly at the latter place. He is good humoured and civil, but has
no dignity. When the Flemings come in with proper etiquette, and stand
near the door, they are surprised to see his English aides-de-camp run
up to him and slap him on the back—all but Lord March, who preserves his
good breeding. The Hereditary Prince at first took no notice of any but
English, which offended the people of the country. He now invites two or
three of them every day to dine with him, but he is evidently partial to
the English. He has a bad cook, and his dinners are dull.

7th.—The riots still continue. My servant tells me he has just come from
Old Burlington-street, where they are pulling up the iron rails before a
house which he heard was that of the Chancellor’s private secretary, but
which was Mr. Robinson’s,[21] and they were only finishing the work they
began last night. In the evening they knocked at Prince Castelcicala’s
door, where I dined, and asked who lived there, inquiring for some
person whose name I could not learn. They went away quietly after this;
but I have since heard they did much mischief to a house in
Harley-street, and to Lord Bathurst’s, in Mansfield-street. The Horse
Guards are on constant duty, and I hear the 16th Light Dragoons are
ordered into town from Hounslow.

8th.—I heard that Lord Uxbridge has the command of the military
force,[22] which increases hourly, but does not seem to prevent the
people from doing what they like. Two persons were, however, killed at
Mr. Robinson’s by officers, as it is said, firing from the house: one, a
young midshipman, lies to be owned. In the evening, about eight, I went
to Weymouth-street, to Mrs. Egerton’s, and met with no mob going or
coming from thence to Lady Charleville’s, in Piccadilly, where, however,
the party was rather small, many being afraid to venture out, and others
uneasy on account of their relations or friends in America, despatches
having been received from thence with an account of the failure of Sir
Alexander Cochrane and Sir Edward Pakenham’s expedition,[23] the death
of Sir Edward, and that of General Sir Samuel Gibbs, with great loss of
officers and men. Mrs. Egerton had happily received intelligence from
Sir John Malcolm, that her brother, Sir Thomas Troubridge, was safe, and
that he had distinguished himself on shore, where, following the steps
of his father, he had fought with the land forces. Sir Pulteney Malcolm,
Sir John’s brother, being second in command of the fleet, wrote this
home to him. When I returned home, I heard that the people had broken
the windows of Mr. Ponsonby,[24] in Curzon-street, and had apologised
for breaking one window by mistake in the adjoining house. Lord Yarmouth
had a strong guard of soldiers to prevent anything happening where he
lives, at no great distance from Mr. Ponsonby’s. I saw written on the
walls on Tuesday, “Guy Faux for ever!”

9th.—I saw Dr. F., who brought me a message from the Duke of Sussex, to
say that he heard Princess Charlotte had been prevailed on to write a
letter to her mother, but not one so strong as was wished, and that it
had, therefore, not given satisfaction at Carlton House. I went out to
call on Lady Aylesbury, the Duchess of Leeds, and a few others, and came
home round by the Park, but did not meet any rioters. I dined at Baron
Montalembert’s, where I met the French Ambassador, Count de la Châtre, a
worthy old nobleman, who had been for many years serving his master
faithfully, though secretly, in that capacity at our Court, and was,
therefore, justly placed in the ostensible situation, with a salary of
10,000_l._ a year, as soon as Louis XVIII. recovered his throne, in
preference to others of more weight and of more brilliant talents. He
had been introduced to me one evening at Carlton House by the Count de
Blacas. M. and Madame de Rayneval also dined there; a Colonel Murphy, a
Spaniard of an Irish family; and a Mr. Cheverix, a celebrated chemist.
Rayneval is a young man of great talents; he was secretary to
Caulincourt[25] in Russia, where he married a modest and amiable Polish
lady. Previous to this he was secretary of embassy and chargé d’affaires
at Lisbon, when Lord St. Vincent was there in 1806, and though attached
to the French Government of that time, acted always in an honourable
manner. He is now one of the secretaries of embassy and consul-general.

In the evening there was a very good party, and a man named
Kalkbrenner[26] played very finely on the pianoforte. Baron Montalembert
and M. de Rayneval sang an Italian and a French duet. They are both
excellent musicians, and sing particularly well. I saw no riot in the
streets, going or coming, but met many soldiers, and all night I heard
the trampling of cavalry. The 10th Hussars, as well as several other
regiments, are come to guard the metropolis. Madame de Lieven told me
Miss Mercer Elphinstone returned this morning from Cranbourne, where she
had been staying some days. She left Princess Charlotte by no means
well.

10th.—I saw Lady Cardigan, Miss Rainsford, Mrs. Anderson, and others.
Reports are spread of coalheavers coming in large bodies to town, of
Bonaparte having escaped from the island of Elba[27] with eleven hundred
followers, and going to the south of France, with other alarming
stories, for which there is probably no foundation. London is full of
soldiers. The depôt is in Manchester-square, and Bedford-square[28]
looks like a “place d’armes.” People are so full of these riots that
very little mention is made of the failure at New Orleans.

11th.—The account of Bonaparte landing at Frejus is confirmed; and it is
added that he has been joined by Masséna and Augereau, but the only
official intelligence is his landing. The King has published an edict
declaring him a traitor and a rebel,[29] and the Duke de Berri and the
Duke d’Orleans are gone against him.

12th.—It appears that Bonaparte landed at Cannes, near Antibes, and that
he has not been joined by any one; that the great towns have shown the
most loyal spirit; and that Masséna has written a letter to Paris in the
same sense; that Bonaparte is now (or was when the last accounts came
away) taking the road of Digny and Gap in Haut Dauphiné. The King of
France has written a very satisfactory letter to the Regent. I dined at
Lady Downshire’s, where I met the Macclesfields, Talbots, and some more,
all of whom seemed to be of opinion that Bonaparte’s invasion was not to
be considered of serious consequence.

13th.—I called on Lady Louisa Stuart, and dined early at Mr. Hallam’s,
after which we went to Drury Lane Theatre, to see the performance of
“Richard the Second,” a play which has just been revived after not
having been acted for a hundred years. Kean[30] is greatly admired, but
his figure and voice are so bad that his mode of speaking and
gesticulations suffer considerable disadvantage.

He is, however, a great actor: in all sarcastic and bitter passages very
great; never pleasing, though undoubtedly sometimes affecting. But this
might be owing to the play itself, which unquestionably has in it some
heartrending passages to excite compassion in favour of the frivolous,
insolent Richard. The genius of Shakspeare is peculiarly manifest in the
change of sentiment you cannot fail experiencing between the first and
last act of this extraordinary drama. It has been altered so as to
terminate with something like a dénouement, making the Queen and
Bolingbroke come and lament over the dead Richard, which does very well
for the gallery, but does not coincide with history or Shakspeare’s
delineation of character. Mrs. Bartley, formerly Miss Smith, ranted the
Queen, and is rather a fine-looking woman. Many passages allusive to
present times seemed to be spoken with peculiar emphasis, and _silence_
was vociferated on these occasions.

The accounts from France are more alarming. Bonaparte was telegraphed as
approaching Lyons, and it was supposed he entered that city on the 11th.

14th.—It is said that Bonaparte professes no desire to trouble the
lawful heir of the crown of France, but claims his rights and those of
his wife and son. Reports are in town of the Marshals Soult and Marmont
being assassinated, and of an insurrection at Paris, but it is difficult
to obtain certain intelligence from them. The King received the
ambassadors and foreigners on the 7th with his usual propriety;
remarked[31] that they saw him suffering, but that it was with the gout,
and that they might inform their respective Courts that he hoped that
the peace of Europe would not be disturbed. Lord Arthur Hill was at this
levee, and has, as well as others, written it home. I dined at Princess
Castelcicala’s, who had been making diligent inquiries into the story of
the _Moniteur_ said to be arrived with a telegraphic account of
Bonaparte having reached Bourgoin, and being expected at Lyons, but
could not find any one who had seen this _Moniteur_.

15th.—Baroness Montalembert called with Mrs. C. B. Egerton. She had been
at the Foreign-office, and found more _Moniteurs_ of the 11th were
arrived, and of course the vicinity of Bonaparte to Lyons confirmed.
Rayneval says the game is up, but Montalembert is going to fight for his
King. At the public offices the business is considered in as bad a light
as possible. Reports are spread of our cruisers being bribed, &c. &c. I
dined at General Egerton’s, where I met Mr. and Mrs. Philip Egerton, and
Captain Finlay, who commanded the _Harrier_, and brought to the Cape, in
1807, the fatal news of the storm in which the _Blenheim_ and _Java_
disappeared.

The French Ambassador had received no despatches from Paris. In a second
edition of the _Courier_ the intelligence contained in the _Moniteur_
appeared.

16th.—The accounts from Paris are very bad. Monsieur was well received
at Lyons, and the troops promised to stand by him; but the next day,
when they were ordered to march, they refused to a man, saying, they
wished no harm to Monsieur, and would not do him any, but they would not
march against their former general. Monsieur left Lyons, but stopped on
the road for orders from the King. The Duke of Orleans returned to
Paris, saw the King, and set off again for Lyons. Soult is discovered to
be a traitor, and the King has appointed General Clarke[32] in his
stead.

There has been no insurrection at Paris. Plays and operas go on as
usual; but it is said Bonaparte will be there on the 17th. The King has
declared he will not leave Paris while there is a hope of the troops
fighting, and if they will not, he will retire with his family to the
Netherlands. The Duke de Berri will stay to the last moment; five
hundred English are arrived at Dover, or waiting for a passage from
Calais. The Duchess of Wellington, Lord Arthur Hill, and Colonel Roberts
were amongst the first. I dined at Mrs. Green’s, Bedford-place, where
Mr. Gipps, Member for Ripon, arrived from the House, and said Lord
Castlereagh’s language was warlike. He had heard Macdonald, Augereau,
and some others had declared for the King.

17th.—Received a note from Princess Castelcicala to say that her son is
arrived in England with the Duchess de Blacas, who is near her
confinement, and the news is very bad. Prince Castelcicala still remains
at Paris. I went to Lady Rolle’s, who is just arrived from Devonshire,
and seems to have left much discontent there with respect to the Corn
Bill. Afterwards I called on Princess Castelcicala. M. de Joinville came
from the French Ambassador’s. He said Bonaparte was not at Paris on the
14th, but that the troops all went over to him. The generals are few of
them in his favour.

18th.—At nine, Prince Castelcicala arrived, having conducted the Duchess
d’Orleans and her children safely to Dover. I went out with Lady
Aylesbury, who had been with Madame de Blacas. She said Soult had not
been dismissed, but had resigned, as it was not known whether he was a
traitor or not. She seemed rather to think he was not. When I came home
I saw Charles Ruffo and the Abbé de Longuemain, his tutor, who told me
that Prince Castelcicala had his audience on Sunday, and that as he went
to Court the people cried “Vive le Roi!” “Vive le Souverain légitime de
Naples!” Only one man cried “Vive l’Empereur!” and was taken by the
collar and thrown out of the crowd. Affairs do not appear to be as
desperate as they were represented. Madame de Talleyrand (Princess de
Benevento) and Madame Moreau are arrived in England. The latter is said
to be engaged to Marshal Macdonald. He appears to be very zealous in the
royal cause.

19th.—The accounts from France are serious, but certainly have a better
complexion than they had. Marshal Ney is said to be on his march to meet
Bonaparte, and a battle is expected. Much will depend on the event of
it.

20th.—Various reports of an engagement in France, but without official
authority. The only certain news seemed to be that Bonaparte was
advancing without interruption. I dined at Mr. Hallam’s. Mr. W. Spenser,
the poet; M. de Pfeffel, the Bavarian Minister, and his secretary of
embassy, were among the company.

21st.—No certain accounts from France. I dined at Lord Rolle’s. In the
evening had two letters from Princess Charlotte, who has had great
worries, but the Orange business is at last really given up; she
corresponds with her father, who seems to have something in view which
will please all parties. I may be sure she will do for the best. Very
amiable in her anxiety about the Royal Family of France, and in her wish
that they should be informed of it if possible.

22nd.—I called on Lady Ashbrook, and made other visits. She was very
sad. Bonaparte near if not in Paris. I dined at Prince Castelcicala’s,
and was at Lady Charleville’s in the evening. The Colonel had just heard
that the King had left Paris, but did not think he would come to
England. The Duchess of Orleans, with her four children and their
governor, and the Countess de Visac, is at the hotel at Dover. The
Regent offered her the Castle, which she declined, and also excused
herself from receiving his visit and that of the Duke of Kent. Yesterday
Lord Cochrane walked into the House of Commons and took his seat there,
whence he was _carried_[33] back to prison in the King’s Bench. Lady
Castlereagh said the news from Paris was not official.

23rd.—The papers say Bonaparte entered Paris without the slightest
obstacle on the 20th;[34] that the King had left it the day before, and
slept at Abbeville on the 21st, on his way to Calais.

24th (Good Friday).—Princess Castelcicala wrote me that no certain news
had been received of Bonaparte’s being at Paris; that the King had
certainly left that city, but that he was not coming to England; and
that the accounts, though bad enough, were not so desperate as the
papers represented them; that the Duchess of Orleans had not heard from
her husband, and would probably come to Town; that the Princes were
dispersed, and were gone to their armies, and that more news was
expected.

25th.—Everybody fearful of a new war, for which great preparations seem
to be making by sea and land. The common people sadly discontented, and
very seditious in their expressions. In the evening I received a note
from Lady Mary Hill to say that they had seen the Duke de Sérent in good
spirits; that the King of France would remain at Lille; that the Duke
d’Angoulême was going about collecting troops, and that La Vendée was
favourably disposed towards the Royal cause.

26th (Easter Sunday).—I dined at Lord Rolle’s. He had been at White’s,
and brought very bad accounts of the reports in town. It was said the
King could not remain at Lille, but was gone on to Tournay, and would go
to Mittau, in Courland, where he was before; that Mr. Bagot was gone
with him; but that Lord Fitzroy Somerset was detained at Paris. Lord
Exmouth is going off immediately to take the command of the fleet in the
Mediterranean, and arming by sea and land is the order of the day.

27th.—The papers mention Lord Fitzroy Somerset’s detention[35] at Paris,
or at least his stay there, but nothing about Tournay. I dined at Lord
Ashbrook’s; heard of the enormous tribe of people who are living at
Cranbourne Lodge, and the confused, expensive manner in which they are
going on.

26th.—Dined with Mrs. C. B. Egerton. General Egerton asked an audience
of the Duke of York, to offer his services. He was the forty-second
person who had one this morning, and seven or eight more were waiting in
the ante-room.

29th.—Dined at Prince Castelcicala’s, and went in the evening to the
Duchess of Orleans (Princess Maria Amelia of Naples). She received me
with great kindness, and appears more amiable than ever, but is very
thin, and has a dreadful cough. She has with her four children, the Duke
de Chartres, the Duke de Nemours, and the Princesses Louise and Marie.
The Count de G. is governor to the Duke, and the Countess de Visac, of
the Vintimille family, is with her. The King of France is at Ostend;
Monsieur at Namur. The Duchess d’Angoulême was at Bordeaux on the 19th,
and meaning to stay there, as it was the anxious wish of the inhabitants
that she should; but what their opinion may be when they hear of Paris
being in the hands of Bonaparte, is not known. An emigrant, who left
Paris on Easter Sunday, says that the strong manifesto published by the
Allied Sovereigns at Vienna, of which two or three copies have been
circulated at Paris, has occasioned great alarm there, and also that
Bonaparte has excited jealousy between the old Imperial Guards at Paris
and those he brought from Elba, by placing the latter, with a fine
inscription, as to the bravest of soldiers, in the Hôtel des Cent
Suisses. In the evening I saw the good old Duke de Sérent, whose
resignation, under all his misfortunes, at eighty years of age, is truly
admirable.

30th.—I heard nothing new, except that orders have been despatched to
the Transport Board for sending out stores, &c., to Ostend. M. de
Rayneval went last night to the King with letters from our Government.
When Louis XVIII. found how much the troops were disposed to join
Bonaparte, he dismissed them, saying he did not wish to commit any one;
that he was obliged to withdraw himself for the present, but hoped to
see them again. One regiment of Chasseurs fell on their knees and begged
to follow his fortunes, an offer which he accepted.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER III.

PREPARATIONS FOR WAR—THE QUEEN’S LEVEE—TREATMENT OF THE PRINCESS
  CHARLOTTE—NAPOLEON AND THE BOURBONS—RUMOURS FROM THE SEAT OF WAR—THE
  BATTLE OF WATERLOO.


                        JOURNAL CONTINUED—1815.


APRIL 3, 1815.—It is said Lords Liverpool and Eldon are for peace, and
Lord Castlereagh for war; the same division is to be observed in the
councils of Opposition, Lord Grey and his party being for peace, and
Lord Grenville, with his adherents, for war. The Duke d’Orleans and his
sister[36] arrived this evening.

5th.—Dined at Lord Rolle’s, and went in the evening to Lady
Charleville’s party. An officer[37] arrived yesterday from Bordeaux,
with letters from the Duchess d’Angoulême to the King of France. The
inhabitants of the south of France are very loyal. Lord Harrowby, Sir
Henry Torrens, and Mr. Wellesley Pole, are gone to Louis XVIII., who is
supposed to be, at present, at Ghent. I had a letter from Rome, dated
10th of March, by which it appears that everything was quiet in Italy as
to outward appearance.

7th.—Yesterday a message from the Prince Regent[38] went down to
Parliament, stating that the events which had lately taken place had
induced him to order an increase of his Majesty’s forces by sea and
land, and to take the advice of his allies for the security of Europe. I
called on the Duke de Sérent, and found he had received letters from the
Duchess, who is with Madame d’Angoulême, at Bordeaux. The people there
are loyal. I made other visits, but heard nothing more. The papers say
Rochefort has declared for Bonaparte. He had made the Parisians believe
that the allies would not attack him: but they begin to be undeceived.

8th.—I dined at the Speaker’s, whose house forms part of the House of
Commons. The rooms are large, and fitted up in the best style of Gothic
architecture, with furniture to correspond. The dining-room is
immediately under St. Stephen’s Chapel, and is, I think, the handsomest
room of the kind I ever saw. It consists of three divisions, separated
only by two open arches; the ornaments, though minute in the Gothic
style, are well adapted to the room, and the whole is well worth seeing.
We had a very pleasant party; but the accounts arrived from France are
very melancholy, and it is said one of Bonaparte’s generals[39] has
entered Bordeaux, and the Duchess d’Angoulême has been obliged to depart
by sea.

9th.—I dined at Lady Downshire’s, and went in the evening to Lady
Aylesbury’s. People in general seem to wish for peace, not willing to
make any sacrifices, and hardly wishing to hear good news.

10th.—I went in the evening to the Duchess of Orleans’; the Duchess of
Leeds and Lady Catherine went with me. Mademoiselle and the Duke were
there. She has a lady companion with her, the Countess de Montjoie. She
is said to be accomplished and sensible; some add that she is an
intriguante. The Duke is much with Ministers. They are all well-bred and
affable; the Duchess of Orleans good, and kind, and unaffected.
Mademoiselle told me the Duchess d’Angoulême was gone to Passages, and
the Duke to Marseilles.

11th.—I saw Baroness Montalembert, who told me her husband was gone,
with ten thousand stand of arms, to the Duchess d’Angoulême; Colonel
Jenkinson with him. Before they sailed from Plymouth they heard of the
fall of Bordeaux, and will act accordingly. Lord Bathurst seems to have
despatched them without loss of time. Princess Charlotte came to town
to-day. The entrance of Warwick House towards the lane is secured by
bars of iron in the inside, and she goes through Carlton House, or
rather through the court. Lady Ilchester and Mrs. Campbell are to sleep
in the house, and the other ladies and gentlemen to come in the day; a
list given and signed by the Prince Regent of what people she is to see.
Only Miss Mercer Elphinstone, and Lady Warwick and her daughters, to be
suffered to see her in the evening. She is to go once a week to the Play
or the Opera, but to go away before it is over, and not to court
publicity.

12th.—There is a report that Bordeaux is retaken by the Royalists, but
without foundation. In the evening I was at Lady Aylesbury’s and Lady
Charleville’s. The Duchess of Leeds was there, and told me she had been
invited to Warwick House the evening before, and that her name was first
on the list, which did not surprise me, as her resignation had been the
consequence of a hint given her that if she resigned she should be
always invited to Carlton House, but that if she waited to be turned
out, she would not be asked any more.

13th.—I went to the Drawing-room; it was the first which had been held
since I was dismissed from Warwick House. The Queen just spoke to me,
which is more than she has done for two years. The Princesses, Duchess
of York, and Princess Sophia of Gloucester very kindly, and Princess
Charlotte as kindly as she could. I thought her looking very pale. The
rooms were very full, but by the arrangements made since the
Drawing-rooms have been held at the Queen’s House, the Royal Family
stand in a small room, and people are only allowed to stay while they
are spoken to, and to pass on. I dined at Lady Downshire’s. Lord Arthur
Hill is appointed aide-de-camp to the Duke of Wellington.

14th.—I dined at Colonel Egerton’s, and went in the evening to Princess
Castelcicala’s. Lord Uxbridge is to command the Cavalry, General
Ponsonby the Heavy Dragoons, and Sir Hussey Vivian the Hussar Brigade.
Troops are embarking as fast as possible.

17th.—A _Moniteur_ reported that the Duke d’Angoulême had been taken and
had been set at liberty by order of Bonaparte, on condition he should
get the Crown jewels restored.

18th.—I dined at Prince Castelcicala’s, and went in the evening to the
Duchess of Orleans’, where nothing new of the Duke d’Angoulême was
known. The Duchess d’Angoulême is gone to Bilboa.

19th.—I dined at Lord Ashbrook’s, where I met the captain of one of the
sloops of war that attended Princess Charlotte at Weymouth[40] last
summer. He said her behaviour was so delightful that there was not a man
on board his ship who would not lay down his life for her, and that he
little cared how long he lived, if he could but once fight for her as
Queen.

20th.—The _Moniteur_ says that the tricolored flag is hoisted at
Marseilles, but no accounts from the Royalists there have arrived.

21st.—Lord Rolle called and told me he had letters from Plymouth, which
mentioned the arrival there of the Duchess d’Angoulême from Bilboa. The
people were delighted to see her, and she was very gracious. I dined at
the Bishop of Lincoln’s; there was very violent language in the House,
as Mr. Tomline reported, between Mr. Whitbread and Lord Castlereagh on
account of a copy of the treaty between Austria, Russia, Prussia, and
England, signed by the plenipotentiaries of these four powers at Vienna
on the 25th of March, for driving Bonaparte out of France if Louis
XVIII. requires it.

22nd.—Madame d’Angoulême, with the Duchess de Sérent and the Countess de
Damas, arrived yesterday evening at the French Ambassador’s. I went to
Lady Ashbrook’s in the evening, and received a letter from Princess
Charlotte, which gave me sad accounts of the unkind manner in which she
is treated, not being spoken to by her father, nor ever seeing him but
when the Queen is in town. The Duchess d’Orleans and Mademoiselle had
visited her, and she was to be allowed next day to return the visit, but
to have no further communication. She is not allowed to go out in an
open carriage, and a coach makes her always sick. This, however, is the
only carriage allowed her, as she must have two ladies and a gentleman
with her. Her letter was very kind, apologising for not shaking hands
with me at the Drawing-room, or doing more than the others, and hoping I
understood her eyes.

23rd.—Last night a new play called “Ina,” on the subject of Inez de
Castro, though with Saxon names, was acted at Drury Lane. It was written
by Mrs. Wilmot;[41] much supported by Whitbread and Opposition people,
and much cried down by the contrary party; which prevailed, for it was
condemned. Everybody, however, allows that the language is elegant, and
the story interesting, but not sufficient stage effect, and the last act
particularly weak. They also say there was a scene of an altar and
crucifix, which on a stage should not have been, and that it resembled
in principle German plays, and had democratical allusions.

24th.—I went in the evening to Mrs. Weddell’s, where there was a small
party; amongst the rest, Sir James Mackintosh, Mr. Heber, and other men
of letters.

25th.—I was at a party at Lady Neave’s, of a different description.
Dowager Lady Harcourt, Dowager Lady Cardigan, Mrs. R. Walpole, Mrs. A.
Egerton, and other genuine whist-players, besides many more, young and
old.

28th.—Went in the evening to Madame d’Angoulême’s, who receives company
from seven to nine. She appeared to be cheerful, and looked better than
when she left England, though her ladies said she was altered from what
she was at Paris. She seemed to regret not having been able to obtain
any favour from the Admiralty for the captain of the sloop who brought
her over. Her passage had been very stormy; but she said she was too
happy to find a ship of war to convey her. She spoke very gratefully of
the captain’s care of her and her suite. She had been very sick; but I
heard from others that she had nursed and comforted all the rest,
thinking of herself the last. She told me she had written to Princess
Charlotte, and wished to visit her, but had received an answer from her,
saying that she begged she would ask the Prince Regent’s leave; which
she thought very odd, as it implied that Princess Charlotte could not
ask it herself. She asked whether he saw her often, and appeared
surprised when I said he had not called on her since her arrival in
town. I afterwards went to Lady Aylesbury’s, and to a ball at Lady
Charleville’s, for the celebration of Lord Tullamore’s[42] birthday,
which was very full, and well managed.

30th.—Dowager Lady Harcourt called, and told me there was a report of a
courier having arrived to say that the Emperor of Russia meant to act
only on the defensive. Lady Downshire afterwards called with a
newspaper, which says Murat has been defeated by the Austrians, and has
retired on Ferrara. General Nugent, who commanded them, was, in the
Paris papers three days ago, announced to be taken prisoner. I dined at
Lord Rolle’s, where Lord Powlett, Mr. Rose, and the Bishop of Exeter
said that a courier was arrived with this intelligence from Lord
Burghersh and, Lord Powlett said, one afterwards from Lord W. Bentinck.
In the evening I went to the Duchess of Orleans’, who is going to-morrow
into the country. She said Princess Charlotte had been with her in the
morning, and had spoken very kindly of me, saying that she was under
great obligations to me; and when the Duchess was with her before, she
had also spoken in the same manner. The Parisians, who are fond of bons
mots, say “rendez-nous notre Père de Gand (Paire de Gants).” They have
prints which represent on one side a bunch of violets, the outline of
which forms the portraits of Napoleon, Marie Louise, and the boy,[43]
and under it is written “bouquet impérial;” but on the other side is a
bunch of lilies and roses, forming the profiles of the Bourbons, and the
motto is “bouquet Français.” Desertions from Bonaparte to the King are
numerous, and the well-wishers to the Royal cause wear “Pensées.” They
say, “La saison des violettes se passe,” a bunch of violets having been
the designation of the adherents of Bonaparte, whom they used to toast
as “Le Caporal Violet.” Mademoiselle Mars, the comic actress, was hissed
off the stage the other night for having one of these bouquets of
violets.

May 1st.—I dined early at Lady Charleville’s, and went with her to
Covent Garden, where I saw Kemble in “Coriolanus,”[44] with the masque
of “Comus,”[45] lately revived. Kemble is now old, and was always stiff
and pompous; but his figure is fine, and his deportment and delivery
above the common. His acting puts me in mind of Seneca’s tragedies. It
is sententious, and not sufficiently natural; but still it is more
classical than that of most others. “Comus” is so beautiful in itself
that it is impossible not to be pleased with it, though too many songs
are added not belonging to the original. Miss Stephens[46] is, I
believe, thought a good singer. Conway’s figure in “Comus” did very
well; the dresses of the “rabble rout” were not sufficiently gay and
splendid, and the scenery, which might have been beautiful, was not
good.

4th.—I went to Madame d’Angoulême’s with Lady Rolle. No accounts are yet
come of the Duke. Desertions seem to be frequent in favour of the King.
The Marquis de Chabannes, a relation of Talleyrand, has published a
violent pamphlet against the Count de Blacas.

6th.—Went to Lady Downshire’s box at the Opera. Princess Charlotte was
in the Regent’s box, which is in the Pit row, and so much shaded by the
orchestra as to render those who sit in it very little visible. “God
save the King” was sung by all the performers when she appeared, and
there was a little clapping; but it has been given out that, if there is
much applause, she will not be allowed to come again. Lady Ilchester sat
on the same line with her, and one of the Misses Coates behind, as also
a gentleman—I believe General Garth. I heard this evening that he had
begged to be excused going in the carriage when she took an airing, as
it made him subject to ridicule to be considered as a gaoler, and that
he obtained permission to attend her on horseback.

8th.—I dined at Lady Downshire’s, went with her and the Ladies Hill to
the Duchess d’Angoulême’s, and afterwards to a party at Lady Murray’s,
where it was reported that Murat was a prisoner, but, I believe, without
foundation.

9th.—I had a letter from the Countess of Albany, dated Florence, 3rd
April, in which she expresses her grief for the partiality expressed by
our English travellers in favour of Bonaparte, and seems much alarmed
for the safety of Italy from the ambition of Murat.

10th.—I find people who return from Italy speak with great contempt of
Murat, except as far as personal courage is concerned, though they were
at first much cajoled by him. In the evening I was at Lady
Charleville’s, where some French children acted two vaudevilles—“Le
Mariage dans une Rose,” and “Blaise et Babet.” I came away soon after
the beginning of the second; in the first was a Captain Duval, who
boasts of having beaten the English. Some of the songs were pretty, but
there was not a little “mauvais ton” in them.

11th.—Dr. Baird called and said the _Morning Chronicle_[47] announced
the intended marriage of Miss M. Elphinstone and the Duke of Devonshire.
I dined at Lord Aylesbury’s.

12th.—The marriage was contradicted in the same paper.[48] In the
morning I went with Lady Rolle and Lady Morton to the Society of Arts,
where are exhibited drawings, and specimens under them, which, I
understood, those who wish to exhibit them are obliged to make in
presence of the committee, that no deception may be practised. The room
is adorned by paintings of Barry, which show learning and imagination,
but very bad colouring. I thought the drawings in general very
uninteresting. In the rooms below were models and inventions, many of
which have no doubt great merit.

We afterwards went to see Mr. Rehberg’s and other drawings in Pall-mall,
and from thence to the British Gallery, where is now exhibiting a fine
collection of Flemish paintings, lent to the Institution by their
different proprietors. Nothing can be more characteristic of the
speculating genius of this country than these exhibitions: money does
everything here. It is true that it is a good way to procure assistance
for the charity, but still there is an oddity in it which must strike
every one who has lived out of England, that the public should pay for
an exhibition of pictures belonging to Princes and noblemen. I dined at
Lord Rolle’s, and in the evening went to Mrs. Montague Burgoyne’s.

16th.—Went to Chiswick to visit Lady Macartney: a beautiful thorn in
bloom in her grounds, and the country in general looking very lovely.
She said the Duke of Devonshire had made great improvements at his place
here.

17th.—I was in the evening at Lady Charleville’s assembly, where great
news of Murat’s expulsion from Naples was reported, but without
sufficient foundation.

18th.—In the morning I called on the Countess de Narbonne, who is just
returned from Paris, and gives very favourable accounts of the state of
the people’s mind.

20th.—I met Princess Charlotte driving round the Park in an open
carriage with Lady Ilchester, one of the Misses Coates, and Colonel
Addenbroke. I dined at Lady Ashbrook’s.

21st.—Dined at Prince Castelcicala’s. The official despatches from
Vienna prove that Murat’s efforts to cut his way through the Austrian
corps, commanded by Bianchi, have proved ineffectual, though many men
were lost on both sides. Prince Castelcicala has in his hands the
original interesting letters of Bonaparte to Murat, which were pretended
to be false, after being mentioned by Lord Castlereagh in the House.

22nd.—I dined at Lord Rolle’s, and went with Lady Rolle in the evening
to Naldi’s concert. It was held at a house in Grosvenor-place, which was
once that of Lord Whitworth and the Duchess of Dorset, now inhabited by
a Mrs. Maitland, from India. Mrs. Dickons, Naldi, Rosquillos, and
Braham, Mrs. Salmon, &c., sang, and a Miss Mortimer,[49] just arrived
from Italy, who seems to have great powers, and taste, and expression.
It was a great crowd.

24th.—Last night, or rather this morning, at one, after a debate, in
which Lord Liverpool, Lord Grey, Lord Bathurst, and Lord Grenville
spoke, the question for peace or war was decided by a majority of 156
against 44, I think. I dined at Lady Charleville’s, and stayed for her
great party in the evening; after which I went to Lady Aylesbury’s ball.
I had a very kind letter from Princess Charlotte, who is sadly neglected
by her father, and annoyed by those about her.

27th.—I dined at Prince Castelcicala’s, who seems in excellent spirits
at the retreat of Murat, and the general news from Italy.

28th.—Dined at Lord Rolle’s, and went in the evening to the Countess of
St. Antonio’s, where Cherubini, Naldi, &c., with the lady of the house,
Miss Fitzroy, M. de Rayneval, &c., sang and played.

29th.—At Lady Aylesbury’s ball. The Prince Regent came at one, and
stayed till two, but did not speak to me, or to many others. Mrs.
Fitzherbert was there, and was much overcome—he took no notice of her.

1st of June.—I was at Covent Garden, and saw Miss O’Neill act _Mrs.
Haller_, in “The Stranger.” The simplicity, propriety, and good sense of
her acting pleased me infinitely.

3rd.—The report of some of the muskets and ammunition[50] sent to La
Vendée having fallen into the enemy’s hands is confirmed, and the rest
which was promised is not to go. I dined at Prince Castelcicala’s. News
arrived at the Secretary of State’s office, from the Admiralty, of the
surrender of the ships and stores[51] at Naples to English men-of-war,
and of the impatience of the people to be restored to their ancient
sovereign.

5th.—While I was in the evening at Lady Aylesbury’s, arrived the
_Gazette Extraordinary_, with the news of the defeat of Murat, the total
dispersion of his army, and the recovery of the kingdom of Naples.

6th.—I had a letter from Princess Charlotte, expressing great uneasiness
with respect to many things, and particularly the speedy arrival of the
Duke of Cumberland, and perhaps of his Duchess,[52] though opposed by
the Queen. I dined at Mr. Hallam’s.

8th.—I saw Madame d’Angoulême at Battersea, where I called to inquire
after her. She looked well, said she left the King so, and that she had
heard from the Duke d’Angoulême, who had left Madrid, and had joined by
this time the Spanish army on the frontiers. I dined at Mrs. Roberts’s,
at Mitcham.

12th.—Dined at Mrs. Weddell’s. The treaty of subsidy to Holland much
found fault with by Mr. Horner, as the debt of Russia was one contracted
for the first partition of Poland.

15th.—Went to Hampstead to see Miss [   ], who is at school there, and
was surprised at the view, which is more extensive and wild than would
be expected so near London.

16th.—Dined at Lady Louisa Macdonald’s, at Sheen. The country looked
very beautiful; the weather, however, has been rainy and uncertain.

18th.—I dined with Lady Rolle, and went in the evening to the Magdalen,
where a Mr. Stevens preached a very flowery sermon, and the women sang
three hymns.

June 19th, 1815.—Went with Mrs. Hicks to the Argyle Rooms, to hear a
morning lecture of the Abbé Sicard, on his mode of instructing the deaf
and dumb; and two of his scholars, one a young man, and the other aged
forty-two, answered metaphysical questions. He was tedious and dull in
his manner of explaining; and I was not by any means surprised at their
answers or mode of reasoning, thinking what I knew of the instruction of
similar beings, at Rome, more skilful and interesting. This day reports
were spread, of an unfavourable nature, relative to the affairs in
Flanders. It was said that Bonaparte had made an attack, and that the
Duke of Wellington had been forced to retreat.

20th.—In the evening I called on Princess Castelcicala, and Mrs. Hicks;
everybody very anxious about the news. It was reported, however, that
victory was in our favour.

On the 22nd came the account of the most decisive and important victory.
The Duke of Brunswick killed, gallantly fighting at the head of his
brave little army—the Prince of Orange wounded—Lord Uxbridge lost a
leg—General Picton killed. The Prussians fought most nobly as well as
our own people, and Bonaparte lost almost all his artillery, with the
total defeat and dispersion of his chosen body of Imperial Guards, and,
indeed, of his whole army. I went with Lady Aylesbury to visit the
Duchess d’Angoulême, whom we found in _sober joy_.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER IV.

REJOICINGS FOR WATERLOO—THE MARRIAGE OF THE DUKE OF CUMBERLAND—PRINCE
  LEOPOLD—MARRIAGE RUMOURS—MARRIAGE OF THE PRINCESS CHARLOTTE—HOW IT WAS
  BROUGHT ABOUT—LATER REVELATIONS—CHARACTER OF THE PRINCESS CHARLOTTE.


                           JOURNAL CONTINUED.


JUNE 23 and 24, 1815.—London was illuminated, and order given out for
the Court going into mourning for the Duke of Brunswick, on the 29th,
for two months. I went to the Opera with Miss Tisdall, on the 24th; “I
Riti d’Efeso,” and “L’Enfant Prodigue”—a bad opera and bad ballet; the
subject of the latter was the beautiful parable of the Prodigal Son, in
the Arabian costume. The actors came forward and sang “Exulta
Britannia,” which was composed last year, and “God save the King.” The
following week brought with it nothing very interesting. I dined on
Wednesday, the 28th, at Count de Salis’s, where there was a pleasant
party, and most of my time I afterwards spent with Princess
Castelcicala, who was very uneasy about her eldest son, from whom she
had not heard, and who appears to have been taken prisoner. On the 30th
I had a letter from Princess Charlotte, very uneasy about the Duke and
Duchess of Cumberland[53] probably proposing a marriage with her son,
Prince Salms Brauenfels, by her first husband, brother of the King of
Prussia; telling me, likewise, she had other views, which were promoted
by the Duke of York.

On the 2nd of July, I went to Lord St. Vincent’s, at Rochetts. On the
3rd, the Duke of Cumberland’s request for an additional grant of
6000_l._ a year for himself and his Duchess was thrown out by a majority
of one, which one was Lord Cochrane, who had paid his fine and appeared
once more in the House. Dreadful abuse of the two royal personages.

On the 8th we received the account of the surrender of Paris,[54] by a
military convention, to the Duke of Wellington. Mr. Whitbread[55] cut
his throat the other morning; his friends say it was on account of his
disappointment as proprietor of Drury Lane Theatre; his enemies suppose
a political conspiracy with Bonaparte, discovered by papers found in the
carriage of the latter. The most probable reason is insanity, at least
temporary, caused by the pressure of blood on the brain, which had, in
the opinion of some, rendered him liable to apoplexy. Colonel Palmer
came on the 8th, and stayed till the 9th, as did Mr. Parker. The Duchess
d’Angoulême was going to Bordeaux, as Madame de Narbonne writes me, but
waits, for fear of committing the loyal Bordelais, now that the
remaining rebel army is permitted by the Convention to take their route
across the Loire. General and Mrs. Egerton passed a day and night.

Louis XVIII. entered Paris on the 8th, and was received with
acclamations and white cockades. On the 10th the Emperors of Austria and
Russia and the King of Prussia arrived there.

I had a letter from Princess Charlotte on the 13th, and another on the
18th, both very kind and confidential. The Queen very ill from vexation,
and still keeping firm in her refusal to receive the Duke of Cumberland,
who is daily expected; and Princess Charlotte is ordered to leave town,
which she does on the 22nd. The Dowager Lady Rosslyn has resigned, and
new arrangements are mentioned. She is first to go to Cranbourne Lodge,
and afterwards to Weymouth.

22nd.—News arrived of Bonaparte having surrendered himself to Captain
Maitland, of the _Bellerophon_, off Rochefort.

On the 28th I left Rochetts to pass one night in London, and proceeded
next day to Savernak Lodge. Lord and Lady Aylesbury, having made up
their minds to go to Paris for ten days or a fortnight, wished me to
stay with their children in the mean while, and to take Lord Bruce on my
way. I dined at Prince Castelcicala’s, and called on the Duke de Sérent
and Madame de Narbonne. Madame d’Angoulême was gone, and they had heard
of her safe arrival at Dieppe. In the evening we walked through the Park
to Lady Charleville’s.

29th.—In the morning I went to Mitcham, fetched Lord Bruce, and arrived
about half-past nine in the evening at Tottenham Park. Bonaparte is to
go to St. Helena in the _Northumberland_, Admiral Sir George Cockburn,
guarded by Sir Hudson Lowe, who was Blücher’s interpreter last year. St.
Helena is to be purchased by Government from the East India Company, and
a regiment to be sent to guard the prisoner. It is reported that Madame
Bertrand[56] attempted to kill herself when she heard of this
destination, and that Bonaparte has declared he will not be taken alive
on board the _Northumberland_, or out of the _Bellerophon_. Crowds of
people get round the ship daily to see him.

Princess Charlotte[57] arrived at Weymouth on the 3rd of this month
(August). She was received with enthusiasm wherever she passed, and the
same at Weymouth; but having a bad cold, she was obliged to stay at home
on her first arrival there.

August 12th.—Letters from Plymouth brought accounts of Bonaparte having
been transferred from the _Bellerophon_ to the _Northumberland_, off
Torbay. On Monday, the 7th, Lord Keith sailed from Plymouth in the
_Tonnant_, hoisting his flag on board her for the purpose of presiding
over the _transhipment_—a word which seems to have been fabricated for
the present purpose. He went in the barge of the _Tonnant_ to fetch
Bonaparte, who, with Marshal Bertrand and his wife, and a Count and
Countess de Montholon (with their children), attended by a few servants,
are to go in the _Northumberland_, Admiral Sir G. Cockburn, to St.
Helena. An officer who was on board the _Northumberland_ when they
arrived on board, says, in a letter to his sister, dated the same day,
that Bonaparte was rather in better humour, but had been very sulky for
several days, having expected to remain in England. During the time the
_Bellerophon_ was off Plymouth, the crowd of spectators which flocked in
boats around her was enormous. Lord R. writes that the people began to
be partial to Bonaparte. The papers say this morning that Sir Hudson
Lowe is arrived in town, which appears as if he were not to accompany
the prisoner.

Sir Hudson is appointed Governor of St. Helena, and is going out very
soon. It is said a Prussian and an Austrian Commissioner are appointed
to reside there also. Commissioners from all the Courts, including
France, have been appointed.

14th.—Lord and Lady Aylesbury returned from Paris, where they left
everything quiet, though in a very odd state, and such a one as cannot
be expected to last. The Prussians are the most disliked, the English
praised, and the Russians courted. The works of art are claimed by the
Prussians and other nations, from whom they were taken by the French.

On the 7th of October the two Chambers met, and the King made a speech
to them, announcing the treaty he had made with the Allied Sovereigns,
the particulars of which he should in a short time communicate to them.
The French complain heavily of the pictures, statues, and other works of
art which they had taken from other countries being taken from them.
Canova is at Paris, commissioned by the Pope to pack up those which were
taken from Rome.

October 20th.—Accounts arrived from Paris of the addresses of the
Chamber of Peers and that of Deputies to the King; both very loyal, and
the latter very strong with respect to the punishment of traitors.

General Porlier, who with some officers and about eight hundred men had
attempted to revolutionise Corunna, has been executed by order of the
Spanish Government.[58]


                                [1816.]


January 10th.—Princess Charlotte summoned to Cranbourne Lodge to
accompany the Queen to Brighton, where her birthday was to be kept, and
it was and still is expected that she is to marry the Prince Leopold of
Saxe-Coburg at her own request. She went to Brighton with the Queen on
the 6th. Nothing extraordinary seems to have been done for her
birthday,[59] though it completes her twentieth year. Many people of
rank were invited to meet the Queen when she was there at Christmas, but
not so now.

I had a kind message from Princess Charlotte this morning, conveyed by a
person who saw her while at Cranbourne. She was much thinner, as she had
been reduced by the medicines she had been obliged to take for a pain in
her side, occasioned by a bilious disorder, which was erroneously
treated as nervous.

This morning I called on Lord St. Vincent in Mortimer-street, as he came
to consult Clive and Sir Edward Horne for his wrist, which had suffered
by a fall. I also went with Princess Castelcicala to see the paintings
and drawings of Gottenburgh, a German from Vienna. He is an old man, but
still makes beautiful small drawings in pencil, portraits chiefly of
Roman women; and his small copies in oils, from Correggio and other
masters, are very good.

12th.—I called in the morning at Lady Louisa Macdonald’s, Mr. Keate’s,
and on the Ladies Bruce. Everybody talks of this marriage, and K. told
me the Queen and Prince Regent, when they wrote to order Princess
Charlotte to Cranbourne and Brighton, said she would meet with an
agreeable surprise. It is now supposed they will prolong their stay at
Brighton till after the 18th, and it is supposed the young man will be
sent for. People say he has only 200_l._ a year, which they calculate is
just enough to buy him two coats and a dozen of shirts. I dined at Mr.
Hallam’s, where I met Mr. Ward, Mr. H. Fane, and Mr. W. J. Rose. The
first is counted one of our first wits; has not been long returned from
Italy. He is certainly very clever and entertaining, but odd, and rash
in his judgments.[60] Mr. H. Fane appears pedantic, but well informed.

13th.—I dined at Lady Downshire’s. The Duke of Sussex and his son,
Captain d’Este, &c. &c., dined there. No mention was made of Princess
Charlotte’s marriage. It is said that the Dukes of Bedford and
Devonshire have received nothing from their tenants for the last year.

14th.—I dined at Prince Castelcicala’s. General Count Nugent, commander
of the Austrian army in Italy, has married the orphan daughter of the
late Marquis Carleto at Naples, whose mother was one of the daughters of
Prince Xavier of Saxony.

17th.—Dined at Sir Archibald Macdonald’s. Duchess-Dowager of Leeds and
Lady Catherine Osborne, Mr. Osborne Markham, Mr. Jekyll, and Archdeacon
Pott there. Sir Robert Wilson, Mr. Hutchinson, and Mr. Bruce, who
travelled with Lady Hester Stanhope in the desert, were accused of high
treason in France for effecting the escape of Lavalette.[61]

18th.—Called on Miss Fielding, Lady Mary Parker, and Miss Mercer
Elphinstone. The latter said she had received only one letter from
Princess Charlotte since her stay at Brighton, and no mention in it of
the marriage.

23rd.—I had letters from Lady Mary Hill, and Mr. Hallam mentioned a
paragraph in the _Morning Chronicle_ of a Prince Leopold of saxe-coburg
being married at Vienna, but it proves to be a Prince Ferdinand.

February 6th.—I had a letter from a friend, who mentions Princess
Charlotte as desiring to contradict the reports relative to her
marriage. It appears that there is some obstacle which she cannot
surmount, as she wishes to consult the papers respecting her engagement
with the Prince of Orange. Probably in this instance, as in that, her
father and his Ministers wish her to live abroad.

8th.—Went to town. Princess Castelcicala and the Ladies Hill called. It
seems Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg _asked_ for the command of the
troops in Hanover. I dined at Lady Downshire’s.

22nd.—I called on the Misses [   ]. Mr. D. said he had just seen Lord
Liverpool, and that he and Lord Castlereagh were to accompany the Prince
of Saxe-Coburg to Brighton to-morrow. Afterwards called on Mrs. R. Keate
and Lady Neave. Mr. Lyttleton had been there, and said the Princess
Charlotte would not marry the Prince of Saxe-Coburg, as he would take
her to Hanover.

26th.—Princess Charlotte goes with the Queen to-day to Brighton. At
Windsor they consider the marriage as certain.

28th.—I received a very kind letter from Princess Charlotte, dated
Saturday, 24th. Very happy in the thoughts of approaching freedom, and
saying that she should send for me to visit her as soon as she was
mistress of her own house. I went this morning to Chantry’s, while Lord
St. Vincent sat for his bust.

I afterwards saw a person, who told me Princess Mary had informed him
that the Prince Regent was quite nervous with impatience to get Princess
Charlotte married, as otherwise the Opposition might clamour for her
being treated as an heir-apparent, and want more than ministers could,
or it would be proper to, give.

March 1.—I was at a small party at Lady Harrington’s. It was said there
that orders had been sent to Weymouth to prepare the Lodge for the
reception of somebody, but of whom it is not known. Some said the Prince
of Saxe-Coburg was to remain there until the marriage; others, that
Princess Charlotte was; others, that perhaps they were to be married
soon, and both go there to stay till after Easter. It is now said the
Prince Regent is to come to town on the 10th.

The introduction of Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg was very embarrassing
to Princess Charlotte, and (what must have been still more so) the Queen
then left them together. He is now sent on a tour, and to finish at
Weymouth, where he is to remain till the day before the marriage. She is
gone back to Cranbourne Lodge. Lord Winchilsea, who is just returned
from Windsor, said at the Opera that the message about the marriage was
to go down to Parliament to-day. Others say it is not to be till this
day week. I dined at Prince Castelcicala’s. I believe it is true that
the Duke de Berri is to marry the grand-daughter of the King of Naples,
by the first wife of the Hereditary Prince, who was sister of the
Emperor of Austria.

6th.—The message[62] did not come down; and Mr. Thomas Granville told
Mr. T. that the reason was because there was a difficulty; for that the
Prince Regent wished 50,000_l._ a year to be asked for Princess
Charlotte and her husband, but only 10,000_l._ of it to be given into
their hands for their privy purse, and the salaries of three ladies and
three gentlemen; the other 40,000_l._ to be given to him to provide
house, &c. for them. This being an intention subversive of all
confidence in their future Queen, Mr. Thomas Granville considered as
impossible to be proposed by any Ministers, and therefore concluded some
alteration in it must take place. How true this account might be I know
not; but the provision has been settled at 10,000_l._ a year to Prince
Leopold, for their joint expenses, and 60,000_l._ as an outfit.

29th.—The Duke de Berri’s approaching marriage with the Princess
Caroline, daughter of the Hereditary Prince of Naples, by his first
wife, a sister of the Emperor, is confirmed.

Cards have been sent to the Queen’s ladies for the 4th of May, to attend
the wedding of Princess Charlotte. It is said the precedent for the
wedding, &c., is the marriage of the late Duchess of Brunswick, but all
Peers and Peeresses were invited to that, and will not be to this.

Lady John Thynne and Lady Emily Murray are appointed ladies of the
bedchamber to Princess Charlotte; Mrs. Campbell, privy purse and
bedchamber woman; Miss F. Coates, bedchamber woman; Colonel Addenbroke,
equerry. The marriage is now fixed for the 2nd of May.

May 1.—The Queen came to Town on the 29th of April. Prince Leopold of
Saxe-Coburg to the apartments of the Duke of Clarence, and Princess
Charlotte to Warwick House. The royal household, the Cabinet Ministers
and their wives, and Foreign Ministers and their wives, are invited to
the wedding.

6th.—Intend leaving London to-morrow for Dover, in my way to Paris with
Sir Thomas and Lady Troubridge, and two Mr. Norgates. Received a very
kind message from Princess Charlotte, which she gave to Madame [   ] on
the day of her wedding, regretting my going.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[This appears to be the fittest place for the introduction of the
following supplementary remarks on the career and character of the
Princess Charlotte, which are entered in a separate note-book, and bear
proof of having been written, from memory, at a much later date. Some
passages have been advisedly omitted, either because they contain
statements of doubtful authenticity, recorded as such by Miss Knight, or
because they touch, in a manner that might give pain, on the private
concerns of living individuals:]

The marriage of the Hereditary Prince of Orange with a sister of the
Emperor of Russia gave reason for many people to believe that he and the
Grand-Duchess Catherine had contributed to disunite the Prince and
Princess Charlotte. What passed at the Portland Hotel seemed _intended_
to prove the contrary.

The King of Würtemberg has since then assured me that the late Queen,
the Grand-Duchess, constantly expressed the greatest fondness for
Princess Charlotte, and the most fervent regret for her death.

The marriage of the Princess Mary with the Duke of Gloucester took place
very soon after that of Princess Charlotte with Prince Leopold, in 1816.

The wish of the Princess Charlotte, after the rupture of the intended
marriage with the Hereditary Prince of Orange, was to marry one of the
Prussian Princes, and some months elapsed before she entirely gave up
this plan, which was opposed on both sides of the water. * * * *

An English lady, who happened to be standing very near the Prince of
Orange soon after the news of Princess Charlotte’s death had reached
him, assured me that his sighs and sobs were quite affecting.

At a party given by their present Majesties (William IV. and Queen
Adelaide) I met the Prince of Orange, who came to solicit protection and
assistance during the troubles of Belgium. He took no notice of me, and
I have always heard he had been much prejudiced against me, for which I
cannot account, as I did what I could with propriety in his favour,
after Princess Charlotte had once given her consent; and, indeed, I
thought she would have been happier in Holland than in England, as every
motive must have engaged the King and Queen of that country to endeavour
to gain her affection; and here unfortunately the heir-apparent is
always an object of jealousy on the one hand, and of artful intrigues on
the other.

The conduct of the Prince of Orange, however, since his marriage has not
been such as to make one believe that she would have been happy with
him. Providence has done the best for her, and, as it appears, for
Princess Victoria.

I have lived to witness the termination of many things, and I humbly
bend with resignation and gratitude to the Divine dispensations.

With respect to myself, all I can say is this. I cannot help regretting
having left the Queen. My intentions were not bad, but in many respects
I consulted my feelings more than my reason. My mind was then too
active, perhaps now it is too indolent; but either I ought to have
remained with the Queen, or I ought to have carried things with a higher
hand to be really useful while I was with Princess Charlotte. I had no
support from the good Duchess; nor, indeed, from any one. She had
neither energy of character nor powerful connexions. I had the romantic
desire that Princess Charlotte should think for herself, and think
wisely. Was that to be expected from a girl of seventeen, and from one
who had never had proper care taken of her since early childhood? She
might have been great indeed. She had a heart and a mind capable of
rendering her so. She had the most charitable disposition possible.

I forgot to mention in my journal for 1814, that when I perceived the
marriage treaty must be broken off, if some assurance were not given of
an establishment in England, I begged to see Lord Liverpool myself, that
I might tell him my apprehensions, and beg that something might be done
to prevent the mischief. He only came and asked for Princess Charlotte,
but when I heard he was in the library, I asked her permission to go
down and speak to him first, which she granted. I went and told him what
I thought my duty to say, but he made no decisive answer, and seemed
impatient to go up-stairs. When Princess Charlotte entered on the
subject, all she could get from him was, that some arrangement might be
made like that between two persons, who were named, by no means of
distinguished families, and at last said he would try to obtain from the
Regent permission that she might retain Warwick House for some time
after her marriage.

When Princess Charlotte told all this to the Prince of Orange, he was
still more indignant than herself, both on account of the comparison
with Mr. —— and Miss ——, and also of Warwick House, saying, “Did Lord
Liverpool think he would live in such an ugly old place?”

Another thing which made Princess Charlotte very unhappy was, that not a
word was said to her about what was to be her household, or how it was
to be composed. But I remember hearing one of my own acquaintance say,
“Would she not have had a very agreeable existence at Brussels, where
she and her husband were to have kept their Court?”

Princess Charlotte had not the slightest idea of that, but supposed she
was expected to live with the King and Queen of the Netherlands.

It is possible that when Princess Charlotte was a child, her temper
might have been violent and head-strong, and the world held that opinion
when she was grown up.[63] I never saw anything of this violence or
obstinacy. Much agitation, nervous uneasiness, and sometimes nervous
impatience,—all this I observed, and sometimes to such a degree as to
injure her health. As a proof of this, it may be remarked that she was
so much afraid of her father, that when she had seen him, or expected
him, she stuttered exceedingly,[64] which she never did at times when
there was nothing particular to agitate her. This nervous feeling was
perhaps one of the principal causes why, so far from being obstinate,
she was often persuaded to things she did not like, and would think
firmness so essential to the happiness of every one, and more especially
of a royal person.

Of this want of firmness the artful and designing took advantage, and
unfortunately those about her had been so often changed, and she had so
few natural friends, that it was difficult to obtain her perfect
confidence; or, I should rather say, to preserve it.

Her humanity and kindness to all who were in distress or affliction
surpass belief, and I never knew a person less selfish. The only value
she set on a present was as it proved more or less the kind intentions
of the person who made it. I never saw in her any personal vanity, and
there was nothing unforgiving in her disposition.

Her notions were aristocratical, though her mind had received from her
father an early bias in favour of the Whig party, of which he was long
considered as the support, and of course that party did not neglect any
opportunity of making her their friend, and persuading her that the good
of the country would depend on her continuing to encourage them.
However, she was equally attentive to all who paid her proper respect,
whether of the Ministry or Opposition.[65]


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER V.

FRANCE REVISITED—CHANTILLY—PARISIAN SOCIETY—THE COURT OF THE
  BOURBONS—THE PRINCE DE CONDÉ—MARSHAL MARMONT—THE FRENCH
  STAGE—INVITATIONS FROM THE PRINCESS CHARLOTTE.


                           JOURNAL CONTINUED.


MONTREUIL, May, 1816.—The appearance of France is exactly what it was
when I first travelled, but the inhabitants wear a different aspect. The
women are not much altered; if anything, rather graver; the men more
stern and sententious than before the Revolution. The people we met
looked pale and wretched, and, except the postilions, we saw scarcely a
single young man. The woman of the inn at Montreuil seemed a good
Royalist, and talked with much feeling of the _bon Roi_, who had kissed
her child when she saw him at Calais. Some of our Horse Artillery and of
the 7th Light Dragoons (Lord Anglesea’s) are still quartered in this
neighbourhood. The woman did not speak ill of our troops, but owned that
our young officers were twice nearly setting fire to her house.

12th.—Some of our party walked into the church at Clermont, and found
the curate and vicar instructing the children. The shops, however, were
mostly open, though it was Sunday; and the last stage to Montreuil we
were driven by a priest, brother of one of the postilions, the other one
being absent.

We had a pleasant drive from Clermont to Chantilly; the people dancing
in the fields. We passed through the ruined and desolate park of the
Prince of Condé; but, melancholy as its appearance was, it was pleasant
to think he is again the master, and every one looking forward to his
passing some time here this spring. When we came to the inn, which is
called “Bourbon Condé,” the mistress of the house, a very intelligent
and loyal person, told us she was now sure of the Prince coming, for
three hampers of Champagne had arrived. She gave a dreadful account of
the sufferings of the people from the conscription under Bonaparte, and
other acts of oppression. We did not, however, find that the English
were much liked, though a Mr. Jolliffe, who had been there with Lord
Combermere, had given an order for purchasing four hundred cub foxes,
which are to be sent over fifty at a time. We saw some of these
creatures ready for transportation. The French pay forty sous a head for
their destruction.

Paris, May 16.—I called on Lady Elizabeth Stuart, who had sent me a
card. Her husband, Sir Charles Stuart, ambassador from our Court, is son
of the late General Sir Charles Stuart, son of Lord Bute, the Prime
Minister at the beginning of our present King’s reign. The house
inhabited by our ambassador was the palace of Pauline, Princess
Borghese, sister of Bonaparte, and is a magnificent and elegantly
fitted-up dwelling; perhaps rather too showy. I called, also, on the
Duke de Sérent and his daughter, Madame de Narbonne, whose husband,
ambassador at Naples, has lately been made a Duke, as a compliment for
his negotiating the marriage between the Duke de Berri and Princess
Caroline of Naples. The Duke de Sérent’s hotel is beautiful, both with
respect to situation and neatness: it has a terrace overlooking a
garden.

I engaged a very pretty lodging in Rue Grenoble, Faubourg St. Germain,
where I have a hall, dining-room, drawing-room, and three bedrooms, all
remarkably well furnished in silk and muslin, besides servants’ rooms,
closets, stable, and coach-house, for four hundred francs a month.

Sunday, May 19.—I had a note from the Duchess de Sérent, to say that
Madame, Duchess d’Angoulême, would see me at three. I first called on
Madame de Sérent, whom I found on a ground-floor of the Tuileries, her
room filled with plants and flowers. At three I crossed the court, and
entered an apartment of the palace to the right. In the first hall were
guards, and in the ante-room pages, who announced me. Madame came out of
an inner room into the salon, where she made me sit down beside her, and
kept me for more than half an hour. She spoke of Princess Charlotte’s
marriage, of the forthcoming one of the Duke de Berri, and of her regard
for the late mother of the Duchess, whom she had known at Vienna. She
expressed much gratitude towards the Regent, but seemed rather surprised
that he had not dismissed Sir Robert Wilson from the service. Sir
Charles Stuart had sent my name in for presentation to the King and
Madame for the following Monday; but the Duchess de Sérent advised me to
put it off as a useless ceremony if I could see them in private.

22nd.—Went to Calaghan’s, the banker, where, for 65_l._ sterling, I
received 1788 francs, the exchange being considerably in our favour. I
dined with Prince Castelcicala, to meet Princess Broglie and (her
daughter) Baroness Nicolay; and afterwards went with them to the Théâtre
des Variétés, on the Boulevards, where we saw four “petites pièces,”
performed by good actors with great spirit, and altogether very
laughable. There were some political allusions, which were clapped with
great loyalty, as was also the air of “Henri Quatre,” which was played
twice. All the ladies were in morning dresses, with great bonnets. It is
a pretty little theatre, and the manner of lighting it is much better
for the eyes than ours, and more advantageous for the performers.

23rd.—M. de Bernis called upon me, and said the reason why three
magistrates of Amiens had been dismissed from their employments was that
they had obliged a gentleman to say that the Duke of Orleans[66] had a
right to the crown of France after the present royal family. They had
threatened him with instant death if he refused. Their defence was, that
they meant it as a joke; but the Government took it up seriously.

26th.—I went out to make some visits, but found no one at home except
Cardinal de Bayane, who is old and deaf, but otherwise not much altered
from what he was at Rome. I am afraid he has “incensed” the idol, and
lowered himself in the opinion of many by so doing; particularly by
obliging his niece to become lady of the bedchamber to Madame Mère.

27th.—In the evening, a little before eight, 1 went to the Tuileries to
be presented to the King. The guards, who lined the grand staircase, and
were stationed in the hall, presented arms as the ladies passed, and an
officer showed us the way. We stopped in the salon which forms the
ante-room to that in which the Duchesses and wives of the Ambassadors
and Marshals waited for the King. When they had had their audience, the
English ladies were the first admitted. Lady Hardwick, Lady Caledon,
Lady le Despenser, the two beautiful Ladies Bingham, Lady Belmere, and
two or three others, formed the group. We had long trains, and lappets,
but no hoops. The King was very gracious, and spoke to me in English.
The Dukes d’Angoulême and Berri were standing near him, and Monsieur
stood by their side: the latter talked to me about Princess Charlotte.
We were introduced by the Duke de la Châtre, “premier gentilhomme de la
chambre,” and the “grand maître des cérémonies,” M. de Brézé. We passed
on to the great gallery, and going down another flight of stairs, found
our carriages at the further gate. The gentlemen go to Court in the
morning. The apartments were well lighted, and the whole had an
appearance of decorum and state which was very striking. I felt a most
pleasing sensation from seeing the King in his own palace after so long
and dreadful a revolution.

28th.—In the morning we went with the Marquis de Dolomieu to the King’s
Library, where he introduced an Orientalist, a M. Langlés, who was very
obliging, and showed us autographs of Racine, La Fontaine, Voltaire,
Boileau, Louis XIV., Madame de Maintenon, &c., and a set of drawings
(coloured), in a manuscript, describing everything relating to
tournaments. He asserted they were the work of Réné of Anjou, father of
Margaret, Queen of Henry VI. I should rather have supposed them to be of
the time of Pietro Perugino, the master of Raphael. They are excellent,
and truly interesting. M. Langlés is celebrated for his skill in Asiatic
researches, and he showed us Arabic and Tartar manuscripts, &c.

29th.—Breakfasted with the Chevalier de Bayane: chickens, lampreys,
petits pâtés, fruit, green peas, cream, tea, coffee, wine; in short,
everything that can be imagined. He lives with his brother, the
Cardinal, and several of their relations, male and female, in a very
handsome house purchased by the Cardinal. They are both aged, but in
good health and spirits.

31st.—Dined at the Duke de Sérent’s, where I met M. de B——, a
distinguished deputy, who is a pure Royalist, and has written well on
the subject of divorce. It appears that these pure Royalists have a
great objection to the Charter and the Ministers, whom the allies
timorously support, to the great annoyance of the former. The
ministerial party give the Royalists the character of enthusiasts, and
tell you they are revengeful and unconscionable; and Society suffers by
all these dissensions. The Royalists, however, are much to be pitied.
They have recovered little more than the privilege of remaining in
France, while the others preserve their property, or the power of
disposing of it to the best advantage.

June 1.—I went with Prince Castelcicala to the old Duchess of Orleans.
She has a fine house, which was formerly that of the director
Cambacérès. She seemed very good natured, and invited me to dine with
her the first day the Prince could bring me. She had a lady in
attendance, and an old Abbé, whom she calls her chancellor, and to whom
some people have thought her to be privately married. An old Bishop was
visiting her, and two ladies, one of whom was Baroness de Talleyrand,
formerly ambassadress at Naples. We afterwards called on Lady Hardwick,
and on the Duchess d’Escars, who, as the wife of the grand maître
d’hôtel, lives in the Pavillon de Flore, at the Tuileries, very high up,
and, of course, commanding an extensive view. Her apartments are attics,
and small, but finely furnished and fitted up, which was done by
Bonaparte for Madame C——, one of his favourites, and reader to Marie
Louise.

3rd.—In the evening I went to pay my visit to Monsieur and the Duke de
Berri, who live in the Pavillon Marsan. Their apartments are simply and
elegantly furnished. They were both very courteous, Monsieur
particularly so, and everybody about them attentive.

4th.—I called on Mrs. and Miss Rawdon, who are just arrived; and we
afterwards went to see the house of Cardinal Fesch, Bonaparte’s uncle,
who is at Rome, and his furniture here is selling off. The King of
Holland and the Prince of Orange lived here, and the chairs and sofas
are not the better for their servants. We saw many pictures, but none
struck me as very fine. There were some beautiful vases and busts, and
some good antique bas-reliefs. The house is spacious, and was built by
the Cardinal, who endeavoured to make it an Italian palace, but his
taste was not perfect enough for the undertaking.

6th.—In the morning I went to the Palais Royal, and to M. Vien, a
painter, son of the senator Vien, who was formerly director of the
French Academy at Rome. I saw some beautiful small paintings, historical
compositions, which he did at the age of ninety-three. He has been dead
only six years. The son told me he had a Prussian officer lodging in his
house, and liked him so well that he begged him to remain beyond the
time allotted for his quarters. The inhabitants of Versailles also spoke
of the Prussians as doing no more harm than they could possibly help. In
the orangery there, by-the-by, we were shown a statue of Louis XIV.,
whose head had been cut off to make room for that of Brutus. M. Vien had
in a small room the bust of a Garde du Corps, his friend, which he had
begun before Bonaparte’s landing, and worked at by stealth during the
three months of his usurpation, the original having gone to the King at
Ghent. He said it was incredible what he and his family had suffered.
Yet his father had been made a senator, and was buried in the Pantheon.
In the evening I went to the Duchess of Narbonne’s, where I saw Prince
Hohenlohe, who has just entered the service of France. He is to have the
command of a German brigade, and has the promise of a Cordon Bleu.
Afterwards I went to the Countess de Chastellux, where I saw some
drawings made by her second daughter, illustrative of events in the war
of La Vendée, witnessed by her cousin, Madame de la Rochejacquelein, who
has written her Memoirs.

8th.—I dined with the Dowager-Duchess of Orleans. There were several
ladies present, and Prince Hohenlohe and Prince Castelcicala also dined
there. The dinner was very good, chiefly consisting of fish, and when we
went into the drawing-room the Duchess and two other ladies worked. A
card-party was formed, and a backgammon-table set out. They were
cheerful and pleasant, and the Duchess extremely affable.

9th.—In the evening I went with M. and Madame de Béthisy to the Prince
de Condé’s, who inhabits a pavilion of the Hôtel de Bourbon, which,
notwithstanding the bad weather, appeared to be very beautifully
situated in the midst of a garden. The good old Prince is wheeled about
in his arm-chair, and his memory often fails him, but he received us
with great politeness. His premier gentilhomme de la chambre, Count
Banqui du Cayla, introduced me; and Madame de Rully, the natural
daughter of the Duke de Bourbon, assisted in doing the honours. She is
mild and pleasing. Amongst other ladies who came in, Madame de Béthisy
pointed out one who, she said, was a daughter of the grandfather of the
present Duke of Orleans.

10th.—Went to the Duchess of Orleans, and to a ball at Mrs.
Hammond’s.[67] Mr. H. is residing here as commissary for settling
commercial and boundary matters, &c. He inhabits the house which was
formerly Joseph Bonaparte’s, and, what is singular enough, the same
Joseph Bonaparte has just purchased in America the house in which Mr.
Hammond was married.

11th.—Dined at Prince de Condé’s. M. and Madame de Béthisy and several
officers were of the party. M. and Madame de Rully live with the Prince.
The latter was very cheerful and kind, and after dinner sent for some
little portraits to show me. One of them was of a natural sister of his
own, excessively pretty, with a fly cap and capuchin. Another was a
little figure of Madame de Montespan as a Magdalen in the desert. Madame
de Rully showed me the billiard-room, where I saw the busts of the great
Condé and of Turenne on the chimney-piece. I was pleased to observe the
respect the Prince paid to the memory of Turenne, whom he seemed
desirous to praise equally with his own great ancestor. He has starts of
recollection, and still retains the unassuming, steady character which
distinguished him at the head of his army. At eight I went to the Duke
de Sérent’s, where I heard much of the robberies committed by the
Bonaparte family; including Cardinal Fesch, who pillaged the Villa
Mattei at Rome to adorn his palace in Paris, and who has not yet paid
the transport of his chairs and sofas from Rome, whither he had sent
them to be gilt.

12th.—While I was at the Prince of Condé’s to-day, Marshal Marmont came
in—a vulgar-looking man, without any military grace. The Prince, when he
found out who it was, spoke civilly to him. The King went to
Fontainebleau to meet the bride, and to give an opportunity for
preparations at the Tuileries. Talleyrand sat beside him, and the Duke
de la Châtre, premier gentilhomme de la chambre, with the captain of the
Gardes du Corps, on the opposite seat. There was much crying “Vive le
Roi!”

13th.—I was at a party at Sir Charles Stuart’s, chiefly English. All the
rooms were thrown open, and some of the guests walked in the garden. The
Duke of Wellington came in a cabriolet.

14th.—Everybody is most anxious to get tickets for the forthcoming
fêtes, and ladies are to have only one each, choosing which they please.
The King has given orders that all whose names are sent in by Sir
Charles Stuart are to be accommodated. I found, too, when I returned
home, one for the church, and one “pour le Jeu du Roi” on Monday.

15th.—I went to see the cabinet of cameos, intaglios, and medals at the
King’s Library. In the first effervescence of the Revolution orders were
issued for dissolving them all; but Barthélémi, the author of
“Anacharsis,” found means to delay the execution of the warrant, and
they were fortunately forgotten. I saw the bracelets of Diane de
Poictiers, Duchess of Valentinois, the Twelve Cæsars worn as
coat-buttons by Henri Quatre, an intaglio portrait of the Dauphin worn
as a ring by Louis XVI., the bracelets of Madame de Pompadour, cameos of
Louis XV. and Henri IV. set in emeralds, the beautiful intaglio of
Michael Angelo worn by Louis XIV., and the fine one on an amethyst, by
Glycon, of Achilles playing on the harp. Henri IV. seems to have had a
decided taste for cameos. His town sword is adorned with them, and his
fighting sword has a falcon on it.

16th.—I went out about ten to see the processions, as the Fête-Dieu is
celebrated to-day. I believe this fête has been solemnised only once—the
year before last—these twenty-five years. The procession of St. Sulpice
was the most numerous, and many ladies walked in it. That of the parish
of St. Thomas d’Aquin stopped at the gate of the Duchess d’Orleans,
entered the court in which an altar had been erected, and gave the
benediction to the Duchess, her ladies, and household. The people seemed
pleased with the revival of these religious ceremonies. A large canopy
for one of the processions was given by the Duchess de Bourbon, who has
written a book on Theology. The National Guards, who escorted the
processions, and who do duty in Paris on almost all occasions, are said
to be very loyal. They are all “bourgeois,” but are well dressed and at
their own expense, and have a soldier-like appearance. They had nosegays
on their bouquets, and nearly everybody who attended the processions,
priests included, had flowers, and the streets were hung with carpeting
and tapestry. I was delighted to see the venerable priests, who had
survived so many horrors, once more peaceably chanting through the
streets. How innocent their errors in comparison with the crimes of
their persecutors!

About three we went with Madame and Mademoiselle de Chastellux and their
friend Madame de Fontanes[68] to the apartments of Madame Montgolfier,
widow of the inventor of balloons, to see the arrival of the King with
the Duchess de Berri. His Majesty arrived a little after four in an open
carriage. The Duchess d’Angoulême and the Duke and Duchess de Berri were
with him. The bride was dressed in white and silver, with feathers, and
had a small white parasol. The Duchess d’Angoulême was in blue, and
looked remarkably well. The bride is very fair,[69] but the people said
she was too thin. Cries of “Vive le Roi!” accompanied them. The military
bore themselves particularly well, and the whole scene was very
agreeable. The windows at which we were placed looked on the Boulevards,
and the cheerfulness of the place, with its decorations of hangings,
flowers, leaves, &c. &c., had a delightful effect.

17th.—In the evening the wedding ceremony was performed at Notre-Dame. I
had a ticket, but did not go, as I was afraid of the crowd. I understand
it was well regulated. At six I went to the Tuileries “au Jeu de Roi.”
Card-tables were set in the Galerie des Cerfs, and in the midst a large
round one for the King and Royal Family. They came in

about seven, the Duke de Berri dressed à la Henri Quatre, Madame leading
the bride. I happened to be near the table, and she introduced me to
her. The Peers who had been witnesses of the marriage wore mantles; the
uniforms were very fine, and the scene splendid. Those who had tickets
for seeing the banquet followed the King when he left the Gallery. As I
passed out I observed the Place du Carrousel full of people, which, with
the cries of “Vive le Roi!” and the illumination, had a very fine
effect. At eleven I went to a ball at the Duke of Wellington’s: his
house[70] handsome, and the gardens prettily illuminated.

18th.—Anniversary of the battle of Waterloo. There was a pause in the
fêtes. The Royal Family went to dine at St. Cloud.

19th.—Colonel Palmer brought me a letter from Princess Charlotte,
expressing a wish to see me in England, with a very handsome message
from her husband. In the evening I was at the “bal paré” at the
Tuileries, in the Salle de l’Opéra, where the banquet had been held. The
whole of the Royal Family were present. The Duchess de Berri danced a
French and an English country dance with the Duke d’Angoulême, and
waltzed with her husband. At ten they retired.

20th.—A review of twenty-four thousand men, and a “bénédiction des
drapeaux” in the Champ de Mars. The old Archbishop of Rheims performed
the ceremony, and Madame and the Duchess de Berri tied the “cravates,”
white handkerchiefs, round the staffs of the colours. I was in the tent
of the Etat-Major-General. It was a long ceremony, but very interesting.

24th.—I went in the evening in court dress to the Tuileries[71] “aux
premières loges.” The King and all the Royal Family there to see the
representation of “Adélaïde du Guesclin,” and “Les Etourdis, ou Le Mort
Supposé.” Talma and Mademoiselle George acted in the first, and
Mademoiselle Mars in the second. I admire Talma and Mademoiselle Mars
exceedingly. The company produced a fine effect. The Maréchaux de France
had seats on the left hand of the Royal Family, as also had the
Ambassadors and their suites; the ladies being on the right hand. There
were also upper boxes in which the company were dressed, but not in
court dresses. The pit full of gentlemen with swords and bags, or
uniforms.

25th.—I dined at the Ambassador’s, and found everybody much annoyed[72]
at the allusions to England in “Adélaïde du Guesclin.” It was certainly
an ill-chosen play, but I have since heard that it was selected by the
actors. In the evening I went to a ball at the Duke of Wellington’s,
where Monsieur, the Duke d’Angoulême, and the Duke and Duchess de Berri
made their appearance and danced—Monsieur excepted. On my return home I
heard that some confusion had been occasioned by a cartridge having been
thrown into the kitchen window. Colonel Fremantle and another officer
went down and extinguished the fire, but it gave rise to some
conversation next day, though not so much as the allusions to England at
the theatre.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER VI.

RETURN TO ENGLAND—MEETING WITH THE PRINCESS CHARLOTTE—FRANCE UNDER THE
  BOURBONS—PARISIAN SOCIETY.


[ON the 29th of June, Miss Knight left Paris and travelled by way of St.
Germain and Mantes to Rouen, and so on to Dieppe, whence she crossed
over to Brighton, and arrived in London on the 3rd of July.]

                           JOURNAL CONTINUED.


July 4th, 1816.—The weather so cold and uncomfortable that I was obliged
to have a fire. London is still full, but growing thinner. The state of
the country is rather alarming, owing to the riots and the general
discontent.

5th.—There has been a great bankruptcy in London. Ministers have sent to
stop deputations from Manchester and Birmingham which were coming to the
Regent. He has a levee to-day. In the evening I wrote a note to Princess
Charlotte to inform her of my arrival in England, and to inquire when I
might see her. I had a kind answer in return, desiring to see me next
day between one and two.

6th.—I went to Princess Charlotte’s,[73] whom I found sitting to Hayter,
the miniature painter. He remained during the whole of the time I was
there, which was an hour and a half, as he was told that Prince Leopold
wished to see him before he left. She appeared agitated, but was
friendly as usual. Prince Leopold came in to look at the picture, and
announced the weather being fine and the curricle ready, on which I took
my leave. He was civil.

11th.—A person called on me who has the means of knowing many things
relative to the affairs of Princess Charlotte, and told me the Regent
and the Queen had opened their eyes with respect to myself, and were now
persuaded that my conduct had been such as they could not think
injurious to themselves. It is probable they knew _who_ was the
mischief-maker.

12th.—In the morning I saw Princess Charlotte, who gave me a print of
Prince Leopold. She was very cordial, but, I believe, sees very few
people. Hayter was there, and Prince Leopold came in to sit for his
picture. Not having been very well, she is not going to the grand ball
given by the Regent this evening.

13th.—The Duke of Sussex called on me early, as he was going to
Sheridan’s funeral.[74] He said the Prince Regent was moving everything
to get a divorce. This I had heard from various people, as also that
Lord Exmouth was to be an informer.

22nd.—Having received accounts of the death of Vittoria Ruffo, eldest
daughter of Prince Castelcicala, I returned to town from Rochetts for
the purpose of seeing her afflicted parents. She was accomplished and
sensible, and most useful in her own family, and her loss must be felt
by all who knew her. When I arrived, I found they were not yet in Town,
as she is not to be buried till to-morrow morning.

At nine in the evening the guns fired for Princess Mary’s marriage with
the Duke of Gloucester.

25th.—I saw Princess Charlotte; her husband, and Hayter, the painter,
were with her. She told me she had Claremont, and seemed pleased with
it.

30th.—I called to take leave of Princess Charlotte, but could not see
her, as Prince Leopold was suffering from a pain in his face. She wrote
me a very affectionate note afterwards to apologise. I left my name at
Carlton House.

August 6th.—I went with Miss Jervis and the Countess de F—— to New Hall,
a large house built by Henry VIII. at a little distance from Chelmsford,
now occupied by a convent of English nuns, who, after various
wanderings, in consequence of being driven from their home at Liége by
the French, have been settled here about seventeen years.[75] The
superior, lately elected, is an agreeable woman, sister of Sir William
Gerard, of Lancashire. Lady Frances Browne, a daughter of Lord Kenmare,
is there, and a sister of Lord Stourton has professed. There are
thirty-six nuns and sixty-five boarders, the latter chiefly daughters of
Roman Catholics of fashion. They are not rich, but appear well-behaved
women, and are very hospitable. The young ladies were dancing when we
went into the hall, and performed three quadrilles with great propriety.
Henry VIII. was staying here when Anne Boleyn was beheaded, and there is
a sign, at a short distance on the road, which has his portrait on one
side and a headless woman on the other.

29th.—Arrived at Buckden.[76] The Bishop of Lincoln has inhabited this
palace thirty years. It is not known when it was built, but it is
mentioned in the reign of King Stephen. The tower which I inhabit, with
four turrets at the angles, was once the residence of Katharine of
Aragon, after her divorce from Henry, before she went to Kimbolton. That
place, belonging to the Duke of Manchester, is not many miles distant
from hence. Buckden Palace is not large, but very curious as a specimen
of the architecture of many ages. The grounds are laid out so as to
agree perfectly with the style of building. Over the second gateway in
entering the palace is the episcopal library, not very large, but
interesting from the antiquity of some of the books. The Bishop has his
private library in a room he built for the purpose. The appearance of
the entire building gives the idea of great strength. The Bishop has all
Mr. Pitt’s papers, and is writing his life.

August 9th.—Quitted Buckden, after passing my time there very
pleasantly, owing to the interesting conversation of the Bishop[77] and
Mrs. Tomline, whose sister, Mrs. Maltby, was staying with them.

23rd.—Went to see an old tree in Thorndon Park,[78] called “the Riven
Oak.” It must be of extraordinary age, as it is mentioned in papers
belonging to Lord Petrie’s family in the reign of Henry VIII. as “the
old oak.” Lord St. Vincent told me it served as a boundary in the reign
of Henry VII. It is of considerable dimensions, and in good foliage as
far as the trunk goes, which seems to be about one-third of its former
height. The several coats of bark, which grow whiter as they advance in
age, are very curious.

September 18th.—Called on Lady Loudon, who has lately returned to
England, on account of her children. She goes back to Lord Moira in a
few months.

23rd.—Went with Lady Charleville to see the cast which was taken from
the first monument erected to the memory of Shakspeare by his
son-in-law. The original figure, which is a sort of half length, with
hands, was, it seems, painted to represent dress and drapery. It cannot,
therefore, be expected that the features should be correct or the
drawing good; but traditionally we learn that the likeness was perfect.
The forehead is beautiful. Indeed, all the features are good, but there
is more of benevolence than of any other expression in the countenance.

[In the spring of 1817, Miss Knight left England on a tour through
France and Italy, and did not return to England until the latter end of
May, 1819. The rough notes of her wanderings do not, however, contain
anything of general interest, though she is mentioned in Mrs. Piozzi’s
correspondence as acting the part of cicerone to the friends with whom
she travelled.[79] At Rome, Miss Knight received intelligence of the
death, on the 6th of November, 1817, of the Princess Charlotte. The
entry in her diary, on this afflicting subject, is brief and
inexpressive. “The Count de Blacas, Ambassador from France,” she writes
in her journal at the end of November, “and several of my former Roman
acquaintances, have been very kind. The Duke of Devonshire, the Marquis
of Douglas, and many English, very obliging—particularly on the
melancholy event of the Princess Charlotte’s death, the news of which
arrived on the 22nd, but I did not hear of it till the 23rd.”[80]


                           JOURNAL CONTINUED.


May 13th, 1821.—The christening of the little Duke de Bordeaux,[81] and
the fêtes in consequence of it, in the first week of the present month,
went off remarkably well; and the people, it seems, appeared very happy.
At the Chamber of Peers a trial is going on for the conspiracy of last
year,[82] and it is supposed both Houses will sit till July. M. de
Chateaubriand is returned from Prussia, and says that not only all is
tranquil at Berlin, but that the Government has energy, and the people
are satisfied. He sat beside Mr. Canning at a great dinner on Monday,
when they had much conversation together on public affairs.

19th.—Took possession of apartments, which I had engaged for three
months, in the Place Bourbon, opposite to the Hôtel du Corps Législatif,
formerly the palace of the Prince de Condé. This is a very central
situation, being near the Pont de Louis Quinze.

The Royalists have obtained a great victory in the Chamber of Deputies,
by carrying the bill for the creation of several additional bishoprics.

24th.—The weather continues cold and windy. The Duchess de Berri has
gone to some chapel near Soissons, on a pilgrimage. She will be absent
five days.

25th.—Went to Prince Castelcicala’s in the evening, and met the Count de
Sèze, who defended Louis XVI. before the National Convention. He is now
a Peer, head of the first tribunal in the kingdom, and decorated with
orders. He was fourteen months in a dungeon, and only obtained his
liberty on the death of Robespierre. Malesherbes, who had invited him to
come to stay with him in the country, was guillotined. He told several
anecdotes of the King, and said that sometimes his Majesty thought his
life would be spared, and that if he were obliged to abdicate he would
retire into Switzerland. It appeared to me, from the conversation of De
Sèze, that the reason why Louis XVI. chose to be defended by the
constitution which he had sworn—or, rather, the reason why he
acknowledged the Assembly as his judges—was that Charles I. had declined
to make a similar acknowledgment, and was beheaded. De Sèze said that
according to the constitution the King could only be obliged to
abdicate. He seemed to think that Louis showed great firmness, and that
he was a man of abilities. He sometimes read Tacitus and Livy with him.
He also stated that the King was sincere in his attachment to the
constitution which he had accepted and wanted to maintain. He therefore
made De Sèze leave out from the defence which he was to read a
preliminary part, in which the latter had introduced a sentence against
the lawfulness of the tribunal before which he was to plead the cause of
his royal client. That Louis XVI. had sanctioned what are now called
liberal principles there can be no doubt. His support of the Americans,
and his first measures with respect to his own kingdom, demonstrated his
having listened to that party; but when he discovered his danger, and
perceived the excesses to which all this had led, one would think that
he must have been heartily sick of the constitution. Indeed, the paper
which he left behind him when he fled—if it were authentic—seems to
prove this was the case.

De Sèze is a lively, active man. The King sent him the other day a
snuff-box, with the portrait of Louis XVI., and a note written with his
own hand, telling him it was the only one worthy of him. The Emperors of
Austria and Russia and the King of Prussia, when they were here, gave
him boxes set in diamonds.

27th.—Went by appointment to the Duchess d’Angoulême’s. She looked thin
and ill, but was very gracious, and talked to me of the death of the
Duke de Berri, of the providential birth of the Duke de Bordeaux, and of
English affairs. She is going for a month to the baths of Vichy. A M.
Prévost, who has often been employed on diplomatic business, arrived
from Naples. The King entered that city on the 15th. M. de Blacas, now a
duke, accompanied his Majesty, and the joy was universal—illuminations,
music, dancing, and general festivity, with immense crowds in the
streets.

30th.—Went to Neuilly, to pay my respects to the Duchess d’Orleans.[83]
It happened also to be the nameday of her father, the King of Naples,
and of her son, the Duke de Chartres. The Duke d’Orleans is now
proprietor of Neuilly, having made an exchange with Government. He is
building and embellishing both house and garden, and has already added
some handsome apartments for his sister.

June 1st.—Met at Prince Castelcicala’s the Russian Ambassador at the
Court of Naples, who is going to England to compliment the King on his
coronation. There was the Baron de Vincent, the Austrian ambassador
here, who has arrived from the Congress.[84] He was at the battle of
Waterloo, and was wounded there. He went as a volunteer, being then
Minister at Brussels, and is said to be a very worthy man.

4th.—Went in the evening, with Prince Castelcicala, by invitation, to
Madame de Gontaut’s, who is governess of the little Duke de Bordeaux.
There was a considerable assembly of ladies, and several gentlemen. The
Duchess de Berri was there, and talked to everybody. Monsieur came late,
but, as usual, was most amiable.

5th.—Accompanied Lady Stafford and Charles Ruffo to the Chambre des
Députés. The house is in the form of an ancient theatre, but the
speakers are not well heard—and speakers they should not be called, for
they read their discourses, and in a very monotonous way. We heard none
of the famous personages, to be sure, but there was one of the Côté
Droit, another of the Côté Gauche, and another half and half. I clearly
perceive that they wish to prove that they have much judgment, are great
reasoners, and that they have what is called “aplomb.” For this purpose
they are as dull as possible, and I judge, not only from what I now
heard, but from the speeches of some of their most able men which I have
read. The question was about the budget, and the man who came from the
Côté Gauche was a caricature of our reformers, for the small sum which
he objected to appeared really ludicrous. All he said was aimed against
Government and the clergy. One of his expressions was, “Pourquoi
devons-nous payer tant pour nous faire gouverner?” and another, “Deux
cent cinquante francs à des gens qui ne s’occupent qu’à rester au coin
de leur feu, ou peut-être pis encore.” I am afraid ten pounds a year
would not make them very warm _au coin du feu_. It is true the Côté
Droit had the good taste to laugh vehemently at some of these tirades.

In the evening I was at a party at Lady Elizabeth Stuart’s, where, by
crowding all together into the middle of the room, we contrived to
appear a great many English; but I do not think there are so many as in
former years since the peace.

18th.—Dined at Lord Stafford’s. Humboldt, the traveller, Denon, Mr.
Fazakerley,[85] &c., were there. Humboldt talks much, and with great
vivacity. Denon I had not seen since 1796, when he was Secretary of
Embassy, with M. le Baron de Talleyrand, at Naples, since when he has
been made a Baron.[86] He is now wild after lithography, and I saw a
portrait which he had done extremely well. His etchings formerly were
very spirited.

21st.—The weather is by no means warm yet, but it has not rained for
some days, notwithstanding the ill-omen of St. Médard.[87] The
Duchess-Dowager of Orleans has been for several weeks in a sad state
with a cancer, and her release is daily expected. Two days ago she
received the pon-tifical benediction from the Nuncio, and has blessed
her children and grandchildren.

23rd.—The Duchess of Orleans died this day. She was a woman of great
good nature, and very charitable, but weakly guided by a man who, she
thought, had saved her life and property. Perhaps he had, but scandal,
very unjustly I believe, took advantage of her gratitude, while his
disagreeable manners made him many enemies. He died a year ago, but his
widow remained with the Duchess. The Duchess leaves an immense property,
of which one-third goes to her daughter (Madame Adelaide) and two-thirds
to the Duke, besides legacies and pensions to her ladies and servants.
The mourning is to be six days in black and six in white.

24th.—At Lord Stafford’s I met at dinner the Abbé de
Montesquiou-Fénezac,[88] an entertaining, agreeable man, and one of the
last survivors of the class of “aimables abbés” of the times of yore.
His manners are particularly good. As a minister he did not shine. He
seemed much attached to the Duke d’Angoulême.

27th.—Dined at Epinay, at Madame de G.’s. The Bishop of St. Cloud went
with me: a sensible, respectable man. Count Sorzo, a Ragusan, whom I had
formerly met at Rome and Venice, dined there, as also a Frenchman, whose
father having been consul at Ragusa, he had had the good fortune to be
educated there. By which means he had acquired wonderful knowledge (for
a consul), and they say he writes Latin verses with great facility, like
the Ragusans themselves. He has himself been consul in the Levant. His
conversation, and that of Count Sorzo, were very interesting. Mme. de
Boufflers,[89] widow of the Chevalier Count de Sabran, and her son by
her first husband, who is an elegant poet, and other clever people,
dined there; yet it was not a “blue” dinner—there was no pretension. The
gardens are very pretty; a lake, with a bridge of cords over it, in
imitation of the American ones described by Humboldt; grottos; the
Temple of Truth, with mirrors reflecting every way, &c. &c.

July 4th.—The King and Royal Family went to St. Cloud, to stay a month.
His Majesty does not like moving from the Tuileries, where he has his
books and his visitors, but the apartments require cleaning and
repairing.

6th.—Received a telegraphic account of the death of Bonaparte.[90]

17th.—I have observed very little sensation occasioned by the death of
Bonaparte. Dr. F——, who lives in the Place Vendôme, told me he observed
a sort of procession walk round the column in the night, but not of
military men. They were probably students, who, particularly those of
surgery and medicine, are disaffected to the present Government. I heard
also of some who carried staves in their hands, walking in companies in
the Palais Royal and in the Rue des Petits Champs, but nothing of
consequence.

23rd.—Prince Leopold arrived in Paris, on his way to Germany and Italy.
He dined with the King at St. Cloud.

28th.—Prince Leopold dined with Sir Charles Stuart. He is often with the
Orleans family. It is said that the Duke de Richelieu has persuaded the
two Royalist Ministers, Messieurs de Corbière and de Villèle, to remain
in office. They were going to resign.

29th.—At Prince Castelcicala’s I met Don Luigi Medici, who has been to
the coronation in England, having left Rome a few weeks ago. He happily
escaped from Naples without passport or bill of health, having concealed
himself for three days, as he was on the proscribed list, and would have
been murdered by the Carbonari. He was an excellent Minister of Finance,
but the rebels knew he would not forward their views. His account of the
whole affair was very interesting. Amongst other horrid things, there
was a procession of forty thousand men armed with stilettoes. It is
difficult to decide whether atrocious rapacity on the one side, or
cowardly weakness on the other, were most conspicuous.

Princess Augusta has gone to see her sisters in Germany, and the King to
Ireland.

August 9th.—The Duke de Richelieu received a telegraphic account of the
death of the Queen of England.[91] For some days the reports of her case
had been very bad.

13th.—Mrs. Lutwyche and I went to the Tuileries, where the King, Madame,
and the Duke d’Angoulême received company; all very gracious.

14th.—The remains of the late Queen of England have been removed from
Brandenburg House, where she died, to be taken to Harwich, and embarked
for the Continent, as she had expressed a desire that she might be
buried at Brunswick. The telegraph gave sad accounts of the scuffle
between the Government and the populace, in which some persons lost
their lives, and others were wounded.

September 7th.—I heard Don Luigi Medici say that there was some reason
for the persecution by the English of the late Queen of Naples, Caroline
of Austria. He believed that Lord William Bentinck, and the English in
general, were deceived by letters to Bonaparte, fabricated in her name.
These letters were forged by a Neapolitan notary, who imitated her
handwriting perfectly, and were thrown in the way of the English, in
order to be intercepted by them. This notary was in the employ of
Bonaparte. Another circumstance which appeared to confirm the suspicions
of the English was this: When Lucien Bonaparte was taken by an English
frigate, he wrote to the Queen of Naples, and enclosed open letters,
which he wished to have forwarded to his sister, &c., throwing himself
on her generosity. Medici and others advised her to show those letters
to the English authorities, but she said that she would not betray even
an enemy, and particularly one who had trusted her. These letters also
were intercepted, and told against her.

25th.—A telegraphic despatch from Calais announced that the King of
England had landed there at five o’clock. He goes to Hanover, but it is
said that he has given up the intention of coming to Paris on his way
home. He had very stormy weather on his passage from Ireland, and stayed
in London only long enough to appoint the Lords Justices for the
government of the kingdom during his absence.

29th.—Michaelmas-day—anniversary of the birth of the Duke de Bordeaux. I
went to Court at the Tuileries, and saw the King, Madame, the Duke
d’Angoulême, Monsieur, and the Duke de Berri. Monsieur told me that the
King of England did not now mean to come to Paris, but that he gave
hopes of their seeing him in the spring.

October 7th.—Went to meet a party of English at Baron Denon’s, who has
fine apartments on the Quai Voltaire, and a very large collection of
paintings, bronzes, and drawings. He was Director of the Museum in the
time of Bonaparte, and much patronised by him. There was a head by
David, the beginning of a picture of Bonaparte when he was in Italy. The
hair is like that of the Covenanters in the seventeenth century, and the
countenance is that of an ill-natured, scowling boy. There was a curious
ivory cabinet, with figures, said to be of the time of St. Louis, and an
ivory bas-relief of Scripture history, from Constantinople, of the
fourth century, besides paintings by Velasquez and Murillo, and a great
quantity of lithographs by Denon himself, who is now engaged on a
history of the Arts in different ages.

8th.—Went to dine with M. de G. at Epinay, and before dinner went with
Madame de Boufflers, Count de Sabran (her son), and the Bishop of St.
Cloud, to the house of Larive,[92] a celebrated actor, now retired from
the stage, and aged seventy-five, but remarkably active and well in
health. He has built a very pretty house on the summit of a steep hill,
and made walks through the woods, cutting channels to drain off the
water in a very curious way. For, as you ascend, you everywhere hear the
water bubbling under your feet or beside you. He recited a couple of
speeches with great effect.

18th.—I was invited by the Duchess of Orleans to Neuilly, to hear an
improvisatore. His name is Pestrucci, brother of the medallist in
England; he is also a painter. The Duchess de Berri, with one of her
ladies and her equerry, came uninvited. There was a very small party.

His Majesty, having had two attacks of the gout at Hanover, does not
come to Paris this winter. A turtle that had been sent for and kept for
his arrival by the King of France, is now put to death.

November 5th.—The two Chambers opened at the Louvre by the King.
Yesterday there was La Messe du St. Esprit, at Notre-Dame, which was
attended by all the great personages of the kingdom.

About the end of November the ultra-Royalists and the Liberals joined
together to attack Ministers. The King was very angry with their
address, which was chiefly, if not entirely, penned by the former. The
phrase which most hurt him was the implied suspicion that he would
forget the honour of France to keep up a good intelligence with other
nations.

December 10th.—As yet nothing has been done towards changing the
Ministry. The Opposition now declare they will vote against the Budget,
and if Ministers continue in a minority it is difficult to say how they
will get on. In the mean while, this stupid business is canvassed in all
societies, and leads to nothing entertaining or instructive.

The Prince and Princess of Denmark are here. I think them like our Royal
Family. She is the grand-daughter of poor Caroline Matilda, and he the
grandson of her persecutrix, the Dowager Queen. The Ambassadors will not
give place to them, and they appear to assume very little state. They go
by the names of the Count and Countess of Oldenburg.

15th.—A new Ministry.[93] Messieurs Villèle and Corbière for the
Finance and Home Departments (Royalists); Viscount Mathieu de
Montmorency, who was a Constitutionalist, for the Foreign Office; M.
de Clermont-Tonnerre, also a Constitutionalist, for the Marine;
Victor, Duke de Bellune, one of Bonaparte’s generals, who rose from
the ranks, Minister of War—said to be an excellent Royalist. The
ultras, on the whole, are much pleased. The Duke de Richelieu and all
the former Ministers have resigned.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER VII.

SOCIETY IN PARIS—JOURNEY TO HOMBURG—THE LANDGRAVE AND THE
  LANDGRAVINE—THE DOWAGER QUEEN OF WÜRTEMBERG—CHRISTMAS AT LOUISBURG.


                        JOURNAL CONTINUED—1822.


JANUARY 12th.—Yesterday the Duchess de Bourbon died suddenly in the
newly consecrated church of Sainte-Geneviève. She was in the
seventy-second year of her age, and was aunt to the Duke of Orleans. She
had been long separated from her husband, having been very gay in her
youth. Latterly she did much good in charities. Her husband was more
afflicted at her death than could have been expected. He said she had
good qualities, and, besides, she was the mother of his son, the
unfortunate Duke d’Enghien.

17th.—Yesterday evening the Duchess of Orleans was brought to bed of a
son, named the Duke d’Aumale by the King. She has since had visits from
all the ladies of the Royal Family.

February 14th.—This morning there were masses of requiem for the Duke de
Berri at Notre-Dame, St. Denis, &c. The Duchess de Berri had one in her
private chapel at five in the morning, the hour at which he died. Madame
de C., one of the ladies of the late Duchess of Orleans, said that on
the night of the murder there was a ball at Talma’s, and that the
company danced all night. A person of her acquaintance, who lived below
him, sent up to beg they would cease, and spare the feelings of those
who were in affliction for the calamity that had happened. Talma
contented himself with replying that he had not killed the Duke, and
that he could not interrupt the amusements of his guests.

May 18th.—The Duke de Richelieu died yesterday, almost suddenly. He was
going to Odessa in a few days. It is remarkable that not many days ago
his writing-desk was broken open, and fifteen thousand livres (six
hundred pounds) stolen from it. He went next day into the country,
returned on the 15th, was taken ill on the 17th, and the physicians,
when called in, said there was no hope. It was called a “transport du
cerveau.”

27th.—Went to St. Cloud. Walked in the grounds, which are very
extensive, with enormous trees and a fine view; also in the
flower-garden, where an old gardener told M. Volney, who accompanied us,
that the day after Bonaparte got in through the window and dissolved the
Convention, he found in the morning many of the scarlet robes of the
deputies in the basin of water in front of the apartments, which they
had thrown in as they ran away in terror.

August 24th.—Left Paris; crossed from Calais to Dover on the 27th, and
arrived at Lord St. Vincent’s, Rochetts, on the 29th.

[On the 13th March, 1823, Miss Knight was deprived by death of her
venerable friend Lord St. Vincent. From the end of August, 1822, to the
31st July, 1823, Miss Knight paid visits to various friends in England,
but on the last-named day she again crossed from Dover to Calais, and
arrived in Paris on the 3rd of August, where she remained until the 29th
of June of the following year. At this date the autobiographical memoir
is resumed.]

In the summer of 1824, I left Paris to visit Princess Elizabeth,[94]
Landgravine of Hesse Homburg, who had been so good as to invite me long
before, and to whom I should have gone in the preceding year had not
business called me to England. Her Royal Highness had also mentioned in
her letters the wish of the Queen-Dowager of Würtemberg[95] that I
should pass some time with her, after having been at Homburg.

Metz was the last town in which I slept in France, and after passing
Forbach, I entered Germany, and was surprised to observe the gaiety of
the inhabitants. They seemed to enjoy their music and waltzing, in which
the children exercise themselves almost as soon as they can walk. On the
5th July I slept at Kaiserlauten. The inn is an immense building, of the
strangest construction imaginable, with wooden galleries running along
both sides of the court-yard. While at dinner, a courier arrived,
followed by two carriages, in one of which was Baron de Rothschild, on
his way to Frankfort, to marry his niece. A great collection of people,
children in particular, crowded round the door, and I afterwards heard
they were most of them Jews, some to present petitions, and others
simply to beg of him. None, however, were suffered to enter. The
sensation occasioned on the road by the passage of M. Rothschild
exceeded that usually produced by a sovereign prince.

The appearance of Mayence struck me as very melancholy. So long as this
city belonged to the Ecclesiastical Elector it was a capital at which
many rich families resided, and where there was a corps diplomatique.
But now no carriages were to be heard rolling through the streets; few
foot passengers were to be seen; the garrison alone enlivening the
place. This was composed of Austrians and Prussians, and each of those
Courts in turn appointed a Governor for three years. The Austrians were
quartered at one end of the city, and the Prussians at the other. The
former, in their white regimentals, were tall, fine-looking men; the
Prussians, in blue, not so tall, but apparently very active. Both had
good bands of music.

I went to see the Cathedral, which, notwithstanding the eleven years of
peace, still wore the desolate appearance in which it had been left by
the French, to the great annoyance of the good old beadle who showed it
to me, and who had witnessed the horrors of the war. The sacred edifice
had served as an hospital for the wounded, and I recollect hearing the
Count de M., a French general, say that the air was so mephitic, on
account of the great number of sufferers lying there, that in the
evening it extinguished the lights, or at least rendered them scarcely
visible. The destruction of the tombs was wanton barbarism; but a few
statues of Electors were left standing, and amongst them one belonging
to an English family. These were placed at a great height, which, I
suppose, was the reason they were spared.

At Frankfort I called on the Princess of Stolberg Goedern, who was in
her ninety-second year. She told me she could not conceive how the
Countess of Albany, her eldest daughter, could have died so young, for
she had lost her a few months before at the age of seventy. She was the
daughter of a Prince of Horn, by Lady Bruce, daughter of the Earl of
Aylesbury, who, as a Roman Catholic, espoused the cause of the Stuarts,
and died at Brussels. He was father of the first Earl, who settled at
Tottenham Park, and left the estate to his nephew, Thomas Brudenell,
whom he intended for the husband of his only daughter, Lady Mary,[96]
but she married the Duke of Richmond, and his widow afterwards married
General Conway. The Princess of Stolberg was quite the great lady, but
had been reduced to poverty. The late and present Lord Aylesbury allowed
her an annuity, on which she chiefly subsisted; but she has lately
obtained for herself and her unmarried daughter, who lives with her, a
pension of 500_l._ a year from the King of England, for which they
appeared to be very grateful. His portrait was in one of their bedrooms.
The old lady is now able to indulge in the constant use of a carriage,
and in going to the theatre, to balls, and great parties, from which she
is the last to retire. The daughter, whom I had formerly seen at Rome
with the Countess of Albany, with whom I was not then acquainted,
appeared to be a sensible woman, and by no means so young in her ideas
and pursuits as her mother.

After staying a few days at Frankfort I went on to Homburg, a small town
situated on an eminence of one of the little hills on the ascent to the
Feldberg. The castle is a large irregular building, and in the midst of
the inner court is a very high insulated tower, which is said to be of
Roman construction; but the upper part seems to be of the middle ages.
It stands at the highest extremity of the town, with a large garden and
a terrace lined with orange-trees. I found the Landgravine (Princess
Elizabeth) in a comfortable though not splendid apartment, and she
introduced me to the Landgrave and to his sister, Princess Mary Anne,
who is married to Prince William of Prussia, brother to the King. They
have been staying here some time with their three children, the eldest
of whom is a boy of thirteen, already in the service of the King of
Prussia. Two of the Landgrave’s brothers were living in the
castle—Prince Gustavus, married to a Princess of Anhalt Dessau, and
Prince Ferdinand. Besides these, the Landgrave had two other brothers,
Prince Louis and Prince Philip, the former in the Prussian service. The
Landgrave himself, a general officer in the Austrian army, commanded an
Hungarian regiment. Princes Philip, Gustavus, and Ferdinand were
likewise in the service of Austria, and all had distinguished themselves
greatly during the war; and their conduct, as well as that of their late
father, had been highly honourable and disinterested. I was much pleased
with the Landgrave. He had a noble frankness of character, and a
patriarchal kindness for his family, which, added to his generous and
humane care of his subjects, rendered him truly worthy of being beloved
by all who knew him. There was a chapel in the castle in which service
was performed twice a day every Sunday, alternately in the Calvinist and
Lutheran manner. He had chaplains for each, who dined in turns with him;
and we went to both services. There were several Catholics in Homburg,
who had a chapel of their own, to which the Landgrave had contributed.
He not only found physicians for the sick, but paid for all their
medicines, and usually visited them during their illness. He often, too,
attended funerals, and was, indeed, the father of his people. He spoke
and wrote French with great correctness, and without any unpleasant
accent. He was well versed in history and geography, and had a good
library of books of that description, and a great number of engravings,
all of which he was most willing to lend me. He was remarkably neat in
his person, and never came into company without changing his dress if he
had been smoking. He was then about fifty-four.

Princess William of Prussia was very handsome, and had a fine figure,
with great dignity of manners. I believe she was well informed, and
patronised literature at Berlin. Her sons, Prince Adalbert[97] and
Prince Waldemar, were then very young, and her daughter, Princess
Elizabeth, still younger. Princess Louisa, the wife of Prince Gustavus,
had at that time only two daughters. She appeared to be gentle and
pleasing, but unfortunately was very deaf. She mixed little in general
society, being unwilling, as she said, to give trouble.

The Germans are very fond of gardens, and pass much of their time in
them. Each of the Princes had his own garden, and the Landgravine had
two, to one or other of which she used to take me in the morning. We
dined at two, except on Sunday, when the hour was three, on account of
the two services at the chapel. On that day there were usually at least
thirty at dinner. We supped at nine, and went to our rooms at ten. All
these meals were announced by beat of drum.

The Landgravine had two maids of honour, and the Landgrave a master of
the household, an aide-de-camp, and an officer who served as secretary,
always in waiting, and who dined with us every day. There was also a
widow lady, who had belonged to the Landgrave’s mother, who dined daily
at the castle, but only the maids of honour slept there. There were
other gentlemen who belonged to the Landgrave, and often dined at his
table, as did their ladies on the Sunday. A Princess of Solms also dined
there frequently, and she lived in a house in the town belonging to the
Landgrave. There was a maître d’hôtel, eighty years of age, who, with
his white wand, used to preside over the dinner and supper tables. The
servants were very numerous.

The private apartments of the Landgravine consisted of several large
rooms, well furnished, and a small boudoir, in which she usually sat.
There was a very handsome suite of rooms, finely furnished, for princely
visitors. The Landgrave’s private rooms, however, were more simple, but
he had in them some good pictures.

Prince and Princess William of Prussia did not remain many days after my
arrival. When they were gone, the Landgrave and Landgravine took me to
dine with the Landgrave of Hesse, at Rumpenheim, near Frankfort. He was
the brother of the late elector, and son of the Princess Royal of
England, daughter of George II. He had not long before lost his wife, a
Princess of Nassau, by whom he had had several children, one of whom is
the Duchess of Cambridge. Her two eldest, Prince George[98] and Princess
Augusta, were then staying with him and his unmarried daughter, Princess
Louisa, as was also his sister-in-law, a Princess of Nassau, who had a
house in Frankfort. Rumpenheim had been built by the Landgrave
Frederick’s mother, quite in the style of an old-fashioned English
country-house, with a print-room, and furniture such as was in vogue
ninety years ago. The garden was laid out after the same model.
Everything was remarkably neat, and the dinner very good. The Landgrave
had not forgotten his English, and talked much of his visit to London,
and of “Aunt Emily.” I believe he was at that time called “the handsome
Prince of Hesse,” and he had certainly great remains of beauty.

A violent thunderstorm accompanied us during the greater part of our
journey back to Homburg. The Landgrave, with his aide-de-camp, M.
Herman, led the way, according to his usual custom, in a drosky, and
very prudently made us go as slowly as possible, in order not to attract
the lightning. I have seen few countries in which the thunderstorms are
so violent as in Germany.

On the 14th of August I took leave of the Landgravine. The Landgrave
gave me four of his horses to take me to Frankfort, and put me into the
carriage himself. On the 18th, I left Frankfort, and passed through
Darmstadt, Heidelberg, and Heilbrunn, to Louisburg, the residence of the
Queen-Dowager of Würtemberg. It was just noon when I arrived, and I was
conducted to the Queen-Dowager, who received me most graciously. Her
countenance was delightful; her manners equally courteous and dignified.
I felt as if I had long known her. We entered the drawing-room at one
o’clock, when she introduced me to the ladies of her Court, and
presented the gentlemen, after which we sat down to dinner in the
adjoining room. Princess Pauline, her grand-daughter, and daughter of
Prince Paul of Würtemberg, was living in the castle with her governess,
and dined always with the Queen. Prince Frederick and Prince Augustus
came occasionally. Her eldest sister was already married to the
Grand-Duke Michael, brother of the Emperor of Russia. The kindness of
the Queen-Dowager to these young people is not to be described. Indeed,
she was continually occupied in doing good. I know not which was most to
be praised, her devoted attachment to her own family, to the memory of
her beloved father, and to the honour of her own country, or her
kindness to the family and country of which she had become a member and
an inhabitant.

[Miss Knight remained with the Queen-Dowager, at her Majesty’s pressing
invitation, until the 11th of September, when she proceeded to
Baden-Baden for a fortnight. While there she received a letter from the
Queen-Dowager, requesting her to return in the first week in November,
and spend the winter with her. At Baden, Miss Knight was presented to
the Queen of Sweden, of whom she speaks as being “still handsome, and
dignified in her manners.” The month of October Miss Knight spent in
Switzerland, chiefly at Berne, and on the 5th of November again became
the guest of the Queen-Dowager, then residing at Louisburg. The
following extracts are selected from her rough diary.]

The Queen-Dowager tells me that the late King of England used often to
mention a story which was traditional in his family. This was, that
George I., not long before his last voyage to Hanover, where he died,
dreamed that his divorced wife, the unfortunate Princess of Zell,[99]
came to meet him dressed in green. He was alarmed at this dream, but
fell asleep, and dreamed it a second time. He then made a knot in his
handkerchief, and prayed that if it were meant as a warning he might
find the knot untied in the morning; which, as the story goes, he did.
He therefore told the Duchess of Kendall, his favourite, that if she had
anything to ask of him she had better make haste, for he did not think
he should live long.

With respect to the mysterious death of the first wife of the late King
of Würtemberg, a Princess of Brunswick,[100] the Queen-Dowager tells me
her husband said that she was always imprudent; but that when she was in
Russia with him the Empress Catherine gave her very bad advice, and had
great power over her. One evening, instead of retiring with him and the
Grand-Duke and Duchess, as usual, she went out of the other door with
Catherine. He never saw her again, but went off, and took away his
children with him. The Queen-Dowager says she died in a Russian
fortress; but whether poisoned by order of the Empress, or in child-bed,
cannot be known.

Christmas-eve; snow and frost. We dined in the library at five o’clock.
The doors of the Queen’s apartment were opened, and tables covered with
presents appeared. The Princess Pauline and her two brothers were the
first whom the Queen introduced to their respective tables. She then
took me to mine, on which were placed a travelling-case in small
compass, containing a silver goblet, knife, fork, tablespoon, and
teaspoon, with a little box for pepper and salt—all in silver, in a
morocco case; a gold bracelet, with a mosaic of the Coliseum at Rome;
amethyst cross and earrings, with small diamonds; two small silver
candlesticks; two pieces of silk for gowns, one a dove-colour Turkish
satin, the other a violet figured silk with pansies; a bracelet of
cherries perfectly imitated; several bonbonneries; a little box with
small bottles of perfumes; figures in sugar of Swiss peasants; bonbons
of different descriptions in great quantity; and a very pretty work-bag
and basket of velvet and silk. All the Queen’s ladies had their separate
tables, filled with everything that could be agreeable to them. In the
other rooms were tables set out with presents for her women and pages.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER VIII.

DEPARTURE FROM LOUISBURG—PARIS—CORONATION OF CHARLES X.—LONDON—THE
  PRINCESS CHARLOTTE’S MONUMENT—ANECDOTES OF CHARLES X.—RETURN TO
  GERMANY.


                        JOURNAL CONTINUED—1825.


APRIL 1st.—Good Friday. On the 2nd I was invited to breakfast in Baron
G.’s apartment, where I met all the Queen’s ladies and gentlemen. We had
a little music, and painted eggs were placed on the floor, between which
the young ladies danced blindfolded. The two young Princes, Frederick
and Augustus, came to dinner, and are to stay till Wednesday. In the
evening there was an Italian from Brescia with canary-birds, that played
tricks. At tea the Queen-Dowager gave eggs, and little presents of
purses, bracelets, crosses, seals, or something of that sort, to all the
ladies. She gave to myself a seal, a watch-key, a cross in bronze, a
steel buckle in the shape of a lyre. A few days previously she had
presented me with a writing-box of her own painting, an amethyst
ornament, and some German books.

April 21st.—I left Louisburg with great regret, and slept that night at
Carlsruhe.

[On the 28th, Miss Knight reached Paris, having travelled by way of
Rheims, where great preparations were making for the approaching
coronation of Charles X. Lord Grenville had succeeded Sir Charles Stuart
as British Ambassador at the French Court. The Duke of Northumberland
was also in Paris on a special mission, to represent the King of England
at the coronation. His Grace’s suite was very brilliant, his liveries in
the old-fashioned style magnificent, and his carriages and horses the
admiration of the Parisians. On the 7th of June the Duke, assisted by
Lord Grenville and Sir George Nayler, Garter King of Arms, invested the
King of France with the insignia of the Most Noble Order of the Garter.]

June 15th.—Went with Lady Downshire and Lady Mary Hill to the great ball
at the Duke of Northumberland’s. The Dauphin, Dauphiness, Duchess de
Berri, and the Orleans family were there; as also the young King and
Queen of Würtemberg, who are here under the title of Count and Countess
Teck. There were fireworks, splendid illuminations, white and gold
banners intermixed with flowers, and the Duchess of Northumberland had a
dress trimmed with lilies for the occasion. There were about fifteen
hundred people, but the apartments are large, and there is a very long
gallery, so that the crowd did not appear so great. All the young
noblemen[101] belonging to the embassy had lilies in their button-holes,
and stood on the stairs to present a bouquet to each lady as she came
up.

[Towards the end of June, Miss Knight returned to London.]

July 13th.—Dined with Princess Augusta, and afterwards went with her to
the Duke of Sussex’s, at Kensington Palace. He gave a dinner to the Duke
and Duchess of Cambridge, and a few people were invited for the evening.
All the Royal Family were there, for besides Princess Augusta, there
were present the Duchess of Kent, the Duchess of Gloucester, and
Princess Sophia, Princess Sophia Matilda (the Duke is gone to
Cheltenham), Prince Leopold, and the Duke of Brunswick and his brother.
The Duchesses of Bedford and Hamilton, Lady Jersey, and several
gentlemen, were also there. Mathews, the comedian, gave two acts of his
Imitations, which were very laughable. We came away before one.

September 10th.—Went to Claremont on a visit to Prince Leopold and the
Duchess of Kent. His mother, the Duchess of Coburg, is also staying with
him. The little Princess Victoria is very like our Royal Family, and
very handsome. I was much overpowered at coming to this place. The poor
old servants so glad to see me! I walked in the Park with the Baroness
de Spinetti, the Duchess of Kent’s lady, and wished to see the cottage
begun by Princess Charlotte, and which has been converted into a
monument to her memory, but the good lady thought it would afflict me.

11th.—Sunday. Went to church at Esher with Prince Leopold, attended by
Sir Robert Gardiner and the Duchess of Kent. After service the Baroness
de Spinetti and I called upon Lady Gardiner, and saw some fine sketches,
taken by Sir Robert in Spain and Sicily. In the evening we looked over
prints, and the Prince, the Duchess of Kent, and Princess Feodore, sang.
The Duchess of Coburg has two young ladies with her as maids of honour.

12th.—Left Claremont after breakfast, and went to Thomas’s Hotel,
Berkeley-square, where I found Lady Downshire, Lady Mary Hill, and Lord
Augustus.

22nd.—Arrived at Windsor, and stayed there till the 1st of October. On
the 25th, I went to see the monument erected by subscription to the late
Princess Charlotte. Matthew Wyatt was charged with the execution of it,
though he was brought up to painting, not to sculpture. Mr. O’Reilly,
the surgeon and apothecary, has the key, as his Majesty is not on good
terms with the canons. It is not to be open to the public until the King
has seen it. The chapel in which it is placed is the first to the left
of the end door which fronts the choir. It has painted glass,
representing, I think, St. Peter and St. Paul, and the light which falls
on the monument from the left is of a gold colour, and that from the
right purple, or rather lilac. The figure of the Princess, covered with
a sheet, is represented as on her death-bed, but appears convulsive.
Four veiled mourners are at the corners. Above the lid is another figure
of the Princess, as rising to heaven and drawing aside a curtain. It is
certainly a resemblance, but too large. There is an angel on each side,
one of whom holds the child.

[On the 14th December, Miss Knight was once more in Paris. She herself
says that Monsieur—at this time Charles X.—once observed to her: “Vous
aimez maintenant vivre en France; mais je me rappelle que vous m’aviez
dit en Angleterre que vous n’aimeriez pas d’y aller.” “Naturellement,
Monseigneur,” she replied; “la France n’était pas alors chez elle.” He
smiled, and said, “Mais l’Angleterre a été toujours chez elle, et
toujours les livres ouverts pour vous.” Though not very appropriate,
another anecdote of Monsieur related by Miss Knight may be here
introduced. “I recollect,” she says, “being one evening at the Tuileries
(I believe it was the first time I went to Monsieur’s; it was in 1816),
and while we were standing round in the usual circle, a lady, rather
advanced in years, seemed anxiously looking for the moment when her turn
should come to be spoken to by Monsieur. She caught his eye while there
were still one or two between them, and he bowed and smiled. When he
came up to her he spoke kindly, and addressed her by her name. “Ah,
Monseigneur!” she cried, apparently much agitated, “il y a si longtemps
que je n’ai pas eu l’honneur de voir votre Altesse Royale, et pourtant
elle se souvient de moi! Les années changent tout——” Monsieur
interrupted her, and said, “Les années! Quant aux dernières vingt-cinq
il ne faut plus les compter.”]


                                [1826.]


January 11th.—Went with Mrs. Lutwyche to the “reception” at the Palais
Royal. All Paris there in full dress, and the room very hot. The young
Duke de Chartres, who is little more than fifteen, appeared in full
uniform of Hussars, and went round with his father, mother, and aunt. He
looked remarkably handsome and elegant. It is said that Duke Mathieu de
Montmorency is appointed governor to the Duke de Bordeaux. There have
been riots[102] at St. Petersburg, on account of the refusal of the
Grand-Duke Constantine to ascend the throne.

26th.—In the evening to the Duchess of Orleans’, where a small party had
been invited to meet the Dauphin, who dined there. Cards, backgammon,
books of prints, &c.

February 1st.—At the Duchess de Narbonne’s, where there was a large
party to hear Mdlle. Delphine Gay[103] recite verses of her own
composition. Her mother was with her, and I understand they are rather
rich people in the class of employés. They were much dressed. The
poetess is pretty, and when she recites has expression in her eyes and
tone, but her voice is harsh. She recited a passage from a poem of her
own on the restoration to life of the widow’s son, and afterwards
another fragment on the triumphant entry of King Alfred. It seems she
has recited some of her verses before the French Academy.

27th.—At the Duchess de Narbonne’s, where many ladies and gentlemen were
assembled to hear M. de St. Priest,[104] a very young man, read a
tragedy he has written, entitled “Clotilde.” Clotaire and Sigebert, the
two sons of Clovis, are at variance, and their mother, Clotilde,
endeavours to reconcile them, but, according to history, it finishes
most horribly. There are many fine lines in the play, and also
interesting situations.

March 19th.—At the Ambassador’s Chapel. Bishop Luscombe preached. He was
consecrated by the Bishops of the Episcopal Church of Scotland, and is
on the Continent to exercise his functions as a prelate without any
particular diocese: watching over the flock of travelling English. He is
said to be a very respectable man, and his sermon was good.

April 12th.—Celebration of the anniversary of the King’s entrance into
Paris in 1814. There was a review in the Champ de Mars, but the wind and
rain were unfavourable to it. I dined with Madame de Labédoyère, and in
the evening accompanied Lady Mary Hill to the Duchess of Hamilton’s. The
Duchess sang delightfully, as also did the Countess Apponyi, the wife of
the Austrian Minister. The Countess is an excellent musician, and sings
with great taste.

30th.—At the Ambassador’s Chapel. Mr. Sidney Smith preached on the
immortality of the soul, as announced by the dissatisfaction felt here,
the desire to be remembered after death, &c. &c.

May 3rd.—To-day the King and Queen go in procession to several churches,
for the Jubilee, and they lay the first stone of the monument to be
erected to Louis XVI., on the spot where he was executed. The gendarmes
would not allow carriages to pass, so I was obliged, after making an
attempt, to come home again. I heard in the evening that the ceremony
was very fine and imposing. The Nuncio says that it was more so than the
coronation at Rheims. After the performance of an expiatory service, the
first stone of the monument was laid by the King himself, in the
presence of all the Royal Family—except the Dauphiness—a deputation of
Peers and Deputies, the Great Officers of State, Courts of Justice,
Ambassadors, &c. &c. The Place Louis Quinze is now to be called Place
Louis Seize.

7th.—Went to chapel. In the evening to the Tuileries, with the Marquise
de Vaudreuil. There were many ladies present, as all the Royal
personages received, and they are soon going into the country. The King
looked remarkably well, and appeared very cheerful. Amongst other
things, speaking to me of activity, &c., he said (what is very true, and
exemplified in himself), “Il ne faut pas se laisser aller.” It is a long
way through the subterranean, the court, the theatre, and the gallery of
the chapel, to the Duchess de Berri’s apartments. She had a hat on.

June 11th.—Called upon Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg. Went afterwards to
the Bois de Boulogne by a new road, called the “Champs Elysées,” in
compliment to the King. Young trees are planted on each side, and it
will be very pretty when they are grown larger; in the mean while, it
shortens the distance.

August 4th.—Dined at Bishop Luscombe’s. Sir Sidney Smith there. After a
residence of many years in France since the peace, he seems to think of
going to England, having taken leave of the King at St. Cloud. Lord
Guilford has lent him a house near Walmer Castle, but he is going first
to Dieppe.

15th.—This is Assumption Day, as it is traditionally called in Roman
Catholic countries, from a belief that on this day the Virgin Mary was
taken up to heaven. A great procession of the King and his family takes
place, in observance of a vow made by Louis XIII., by which he placed
himself, his family, and kingdom, under the protection of the Virgin.
To-day also closes the Jubilee, and the King has given a silver statue
of the Virgin and infant Saviour to the Cathedral of Notre-Dame.

September 23rd.—Arrived at Mayence. The melancholy appearance of that
once flourishing city is really painful to behold. The inhabitants say
that they would be totally ruined were it not for the money spent by the
military. But the taxes they have to pay to their present master, the
Grand-Duke of Hesse Darmstadt, and the impediments to commerce and
manufacture, with the departure of so many noble families resident there
during the time of their Electors, reduce them to a state of great
misery. So much for the benefits arising from revolutionary changes and
extinction of ecclesiastical power! They say they were better off under
the French than under the Grand-Duke, but nothing to be compared to
their ancient Electoral government, and as the French were the cause of
that being overthrown, they naturally date their misfortunes from that
period. The military had given some fêtes during the summer, and there
was to be music and illuminations on the following day, Sunday, the
24th. That morning I left Mayence, to see the lovely banks of the Rhine,
which we followed as far as Coblentz, by an excellent road. The old
castles and ruined monasteries, the beautiful trees and rocks, render
the journey very interesting. At Bingen, about fifteen miles from
Mayence, we entered the Prussian territory. The postmasters give a
receipt at every stage. A printed paper was also given to me for my
baggage, and all seemed to be done with civility and regularity. Under
Bingen, on a rock in the Rhine, are the ruins of the Mice Tower, so
called from the story of Hatto, the Bishop of Mayence, who was said to
have been eaten up by those animals. There is a legend belonging to each
of the old ruined castles and monasteries. The banks of the river are
covered with vines, raised in rows one above the other. At St. Goar
there was formerly a very large monastery. The place appears more
comfortable than many others, and the situation is picturesque. I paid
thirteen posts to Coblentz, but the distance is not so much, as I went
in ten hours. At one place, where the road passed under high rocks very
near the river, and had others of a similar description in view on the
opposite side, the postilion stopped and blew his horn for some minutes
in a very agreeable manner, which was perfectly answered by the echo.

25th.—In the morning oppressively hot. Walked down to the banks of the
Rhine, where I witnessed the departure of the “coche d’eau” for Mayence:
two horses, with very long ropes, were to drag it up the river. In the
afternoon I went in a calèche, with a very intelligent driver, to see
the fortress on the other side of the Rhine, which the King of Prussia
is building on the ruins of Ehrenbreitstein. The works are very fine.
They were begun in 1816, and will require four years more to finish
them. The rock appears almost perpendicular, yet I went up in the
carriage with great ease and safety, as it is remarkably well made and a
perfect zig-zag. I saw the cannons, barracks, magazines, &c. Eight
thousand men, with provisions and ammunition, are to be provided here,
and the fortress is to be called Frederick William, after its founder.
The view is very extensive from the platform at the top. The Moselle,
throwing itself into the Rhine, the town of Coblentz, the bridge of
boats, and the circumjacent country, were at my feet, and the four forts
opposite were pointed out by my conductor, named Francis, Alexander,
Constantine, and Wellington. The town, however, appeared enveloped in a
pitchy cloud. A heavy thunderstorm was coming on, and I foolishly hoped
to get back before it should break over our heads. I therefore hurried
away, and, though the hood and apron of the calèche were put up, my maid
and I were wet to the skin by the time we reached the hotel—the wind
blowing torrents of rain into the carriage.

26th.—Returned to Mayence. The prospects appeared, if possible, more
beautiful than before. It is not the lovely, enchanting style of beauty
which Italian scenery presents, but it is wild and romantic. It is the
theatre of the mythology of the middle ages.

30th.—Went to Homburg, and found the Landgrave in the court—he had seen
me drive in. He took me to the Landgravine, and nothing could be more
kind and cordial than their reception of me.

October 21st.—We dined early, that we might go at half-past one to the
Feldberg, the highest mountain in this part of the country—in ancient
times the Taunus. The weather was beautiful. The Landgrave and his
aide-de-camp, M. Herman, were the vanguard; next came the Landgravine
and Princess Augusta of Solms; then Miss Cooper and myself; and lastly,
the two maids of honour, Mdlles. de Stein and de Haller: all in droskies
with four horses, which ran up the mountain like greyhounds. The road
passed through woods till very near the summit, which is covered with
luxuriant grass and fragments of rock. The Landgrave had sent thirty men
the day before to repair the road. There is a mass of rock with grottoes
in it, which is called the Rock of Brunehilda. The view from the summit
is very extensive, embracing the Rhine and the Maine, with the towns,
cities, and villages on their banks, Falkenstein, Konigstein, and other
mountains, with the ruins of castles and fortifications on other parts
of the Taunus, inferior in height to the Feldberg, which is two thousand
six hundred and six feet above the surface of the sea. The air felt
sharp and pure. We partook of coffee and cakes here. Warm punch was also
served; for the grottoes in Brunehilda’s rock served as a kitchen, as
well as for stables for the horses—a table, chairs, &c., having been
previously sent up. We returned home with a fine sunset.

November 11th.—Arrived at the Castle of Louisburg about six in the
evening. Found the Queen-Dowager and all her society most kind and
friendly.

19th.—Went to Stuttgard, in consequence of an invitation to dine with
the King and Queen. Dressed at the Hôtel du Roi d’Angleterre. At a
quarter-past four Baroness Seckendorff, the young Queen’s first lady,
came for me, and took me to the palace. She introduced me to the Queen
in her Majesty’s private apartments, which are very elegant. The Queen
seated me on a sofa by her side, and the King soon afterwards came in
and sat down. They were both very gracious and conversible. At five they
withdrew, and we went down to the apartments below, where we found the
gentlemen and ladies of the Court, and the Prince and Princess of
Hohenlohe œhringen, which last is a first cousin of his Majesty. Soon
afterwards the King and Queen came in, and we went to dinner. The King
placed the Princess of œhringen on his right hand, and made me sit
beside him on his left. He talked to me all dinner-time, chiefly about
the domestic events of our Royal Family in 1814, when I was with the
late Princess Charlotte. After dinner we returned to the drawing-room,
where coffee was served; and the King and Queen, after a very gracious
leave-taking, quitted the room and went to the theatre. Madame de
Seckendorff and the Queen’s Chamberlain took me through the palace to
the Queen-Dowager’s box, and five minutes later the King and Queen
entered their private box; the rest of the Royal Family occupying the
great box in the centre of the house. Between the opera and the ballet
the King and Queen joined the Royal Family, and also spoke to Lady
Erskine in the adjoining box. I returned to Louisburg after the ballet,
arriving there a little past eleven.

December 1st.—This day the Constituent Assembly, or States of
Würtemberg, meet. It is held every third year. The King opens the
meeting, and the Prince of Hohenlohe œhringen is the President. No
ladies are admitted as spectators.

15th.—At dinner the Prince of Wallerstein; descended by the female side
from the Würtemberg family. This young man is Regent of the little
States belonging to his family, his eldest brother having renounced his
rights on marrying a gardener’s daughter, with whom he retired to a
castle to enjoy rural felicity. The second brother, who is now Prince,
is in the Austrian service, and on garrison duty in Bohemia, and has
entrusted the Regency to this Prince, who is the third son.

20th.—After dinner I went up-stairs to see a fine suite of apartments
above those of the late King, called the Crown Prince’s. This castle is
an immense building. Were it inhabited at all in proportion to its size,
it would be very cheerful, for all the apartments are light and
spacious. The hangings and furniture of those of the Crown Prince are of
damask, and there is much gilding. The pictures are not good, but in
some of the rooms very numerous.

24th.—In the evening the Queen made her Christmas presents to her ladies
and gentlemen. There was a table also for me, covered with pretty
things, including a gold chain, a cross, and earrings, a silver cup and
saucer, a silver tower for heating water, three gowns,[105] &c.

31st.—The year was finished very cordially in the castle, and very
noisily out of doors; for notwithstanding all the edicts against it,
gunpowder announces the termination of the old year and the commencement
of the new one, to the great annoyance of the peaceable inhabitants. In
the town there was a ball, and in the castle “pictures” were represented
by the principal dancers at the theatre.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER IX.

PARIS AND LONDON—DEATH OF THE QUEEN-DOWAGER OF WÜRTEMBERG—HOMBURG—THE
  LANDGRAVE AND LANDGRAVINE—LIFE AT A GERMAN COURT—RETURN TO
  LOUISBURG—BADEN.


                        JOURNAL CONTINUED—1827.


JANUARY 11th.—In the afternoon Lord Erskine brought the Queen-Dowager
letters from Mr. Canning and Count Munster, announcing the death of the
Duke of York at half-past nine in the evening of the 5th. They came by a
messenger despatched by Mr. Canning, by order of his Majesty.

April 30th.—Arrived at Paris. The National Guard are dismissed, in
consequence of their riotous behaviour last night, crying out “A bas les
Ministres!” It is said many ill-intentioned persons made up uniforms and
mixed with them, for the purpose of creating confusion.

May 14th.—In the evening went with the Viscountess de Vaudreuil to visit
the Duke and Duchess de Rivière at the Tuileries, in the apartments
formerly occupied by the King when he was Monsieur. The little Duke de
Bordeaux was there, M. de Rivière being his governor. He appeared very
lively and good natured. He is not very tall for his age, but has an
elegant and well-proportioned figure. He seems to possess quickness and
intelligence. His Royal Highness had with him two sub-preceptors and a
young companion—the son of the Duke—three years and a half older than
himself. The “salon” is, as before, furnished with stools, and with only
one arm-chair for the King.

August 1st.—Went to St. Ouen to visit the Countess du Cayla and her
daughter, the Princess de Craon. Their house is in the midst of very
extensive grounds and gardens. It appears like a pavilion; but on
entering we found an elegant staircase, carpeted as in England, and well
proportioned rooms elegantly furnished. On the first floor we saw a
“salon” and two handsome bedrooms, with a Gothic “cabinet” in the best
style of that species of architecture. On the ground floor an excellent
dining-room, billiard-room, “salon,” and “cabinet de bain,” all fitted
up in good taste, the locks good, and the doors shutting well. In the
“salon” is an inscription by Louis XVIII., to the effect that here began
a new era in the liberties of France. It was here that he met the Allied
Sovereigns and Ministers in 1814, and gave the Charter. He afterwards
with great secrecy rebuilt the house, or, rather, erected this very
beautiful villa, and made all the plans himself. He then presented it to
Madame du Cayla, as a residence for her life; and the present King
allows her two thousand five hundred livres a year to keep up the place.
The floors are very handsome, and almost all the furniture is of French
wood.

8th.—Went with the Bishop of Tulle to Athis, a place belonging to the
Baroness de Crussol, about four leagues from Paris, on the road to
Fontainebleau. The grounds are well laid out, with fine trees, and the
house is large and commodious, very nice, and in good order. The poor
lady herself, who is very civil and good natured, has nearly lost her
mental faculties; but a friend of her late husband manages everything
for her. In the grounds is a Gothic chapel, as also the Temple of Flora
and a rustic building, all of which are well placed. There is likewise
the tomb of a dog, with his image at the top. It seems that when this
place belonged to the Duchess de Roquelaure, in the reign of Louis XIV.,
Mademoiselle de Scudéry had a dog named Badine, who died while she was
staying here. At that time the philosophers wanted to introduce the
doctrine that animals are only machines. The epitaph engraved on the
tomb alludes to this:

                     Ci-gît la célèbre Badine,
                     Qui n’eut ni beauté, ni bonté,
                     Mais dont l’esprit a démonté
                     Le système de la machine.

In the house are several good apartments: that in which the Countess
d’Alton sleeps was the chamber of Marshal Villars. The views from the
house are very extensive.

9th.—News by the telegraph of the death of Mr. Canning, who expired
yesterday, at the Duke of Devonshire’s villa at Chiswick.

13th.—Six Indians arrived, four men and two women, with an interpreter
and his son, and a French colonel, from Havre de Grace. They come from
the banks of the river Missouri, in America. The gate and opposite side
of the street are thronged with people trying to stare at them.

16th.—This morning the Indian chief and the two women came to my
apartment with the housekeeper and the porter. He appeared grave in his
manners, but offered his hand, as did also the women. The latter seemed
very cheerful. Their colour is bronze. I thought there was a natural
gracefulness in the figure of the chief, and in his manner of holding
his drapery. His arms were bare, with silver armlets on them; but his
white mantle was wrapped about him. Their hair is black and long, but,
according to the Indian custom, consisting of only one lock at the top
of the head. It is said they brought with them furs of value, which they
sold at Havre.

September 16th.—Dined at Prince Castelcicala’s, to meet the Countess
Esterhazy and her two daughters. The Austrian Ambassador, Count Apponyi,
with the Countess and his nephew, and Monseigneur Acton, also dined
there. The Countess Esterhazy is the most intimate friend of the
Dauphiness. When the latter went to Vienna from her prison at Paris, a
lady was placed about her who had a niece very handsome and agreeable.
At first the Dauphiness, accustomed to the mournful and appalling
solitude of the Temple, could not appreciate the society of this young
lady, but by degrees the cheerfulness and attentions of her companion
made their way into her heart, and ever since that time she has loved
her most sincerely. On the day on which the Princess gave her hand to
the Duke d’Angoulême, her young friend was united to Count Esterhazy;
and since her return to France she has exacted that every second year
the Countess should visit her and pass some time with her. Her Royal
Highness then takes her about to see everything that is interesting,
lodges her in the Park of St. Cloud, and bestows upon her every mark of
real affection. The Count and Countess have passed five winters in Rome
on account of his health; but they are now going to Hungary.


                                [1828.]


January 24th.—Went to the banker’s. Great preparations in the court-yard
for the forthcoming marriage of Mademoiselle Lafitte with the Prince de
la Moskwa, son of the late Marshal Ney. The young lady, it is said,
wanted to marry her father’s head clerk, but M. Lafitte had not
sufficient love for liberty and equality to allow this. It is curious to
observe how fond of titles are all these people who profess “liberal”
principles.

February 5th.—This morning the opening of the Chambers took place at the
Louvre, and the King made a good speech, which was applauded, and he was
welcomed, and accompanied at his departure by cries of “_Vive le Roi!_”
Speaking of the battle of Navarino, he called it _imprévue_; but alluded
to the glory of the French arms, and of their union with those of their
allies. I remarked, on hearing the speech read, that his Majesty placed
the King of England before the Emperor of Russia.[106] Ecclesiastical
affairs and public instruction are to be separate. It is said a very
wealthy and sensible man is appointed to be at the head of public
instruction—a lawyer, but of good religious and moral principles.[107]

21st.—Dined at Lady Downshire’s. Sir Thomas Fellowes there. He has been
in England since the battle of Navarino, and is returning to Toulon to
rejoin the squadron. This evening he saw the King, who spoke, as indeed
he always does, most cordially of England.

[On the 12th of April Miss Knight returned to England, and expressed
much astonishment at the improvements in London since her former visit.]

June 16th.—In the evening at Princess Sophia’s. Sir J. C. came in, and
gave a droll account of the magnificent breakfast given to-day by the
Duchess of St. Albans, at her villa near town. Almost all the best
musical performers of our nation were there, besides the Tyrolese
singers and others. A silver bread-basket of vast dimensions was handed
about, and an inscription on it was read aloud, announcing the happiness
of the Duke and Duchess in this, the first year of their married life,
and their intention of claiming the flitch of bacon at Dunmow six years
hence: for which purpose they had prepared this basket. The Dukes of
Cumberland and Sussex, and Prince Leopold, were there.

July 10th.—Dined at Lord Stafford’s. Miss Eden, Mr. and Mrs. Mason, Mr.
Wilkie, the celebrated painter, just returned from Italy and Spain, Mr.
and Mrs. Calcott, he a painter, and she the Mrs. Graham who was
governess to the children of the Emperor of Brazil, were of the party.
Saw some good views of Edinburgh, Stirling, and other parts of Scotland,
by Lady Stafford. We were received in the gallery where the Flemish
pictures are hung, and dined in the other, furnished with such noble
paintings, as also is the drawing-room—magnificent treasures! The four
great landscapes in the room last named are to me delightful.

29th.—Went early to Princess Augusta at Frogmore. The garden is much
improved, and in great beauty just now. Dear Princess Augusta makes all
happy around her.

[On the 13th of August, Miss Knight again left England for Paris, where
she remained until the 2nd of October. On that day she started for
Germany, and on her arrival at Frankfort, eight days afterwards,
received the melancholy news of the death of the Queen-Dowager of
Würtemberg, “who expired on Monday, the 6th, at a quarter before two—a
dreadful loss to the country where she lived, and to all who knew her.”
On the following day, October 11, Miss Knight reached Homburg, and was,
as usual, kindly greeted by the Landgrave and Landgravine.]

November 7th.—M. Möller, architect of the Grand-Duke of Hesse Darmstadt,
dined here, and he called upon me in the afternoon. He told me that the
Cathedral of Worms is of, what they call in Germany, Byzantine
architecture. There is a difference, he says, between that and the
Saxon; for our Saxon buildings in England are, in fact, imitations of
the Roman, whereas the Byzantine came from Constantinople, where the
Roman was intermixed with the Oriental, whence came the cupolas,
minarets, &c. He also mentioned that at Vienna were preserved many
records of the articles they used to receive there from Constantinople,
which was in its time the arbiter of taste. In return, the Germans sent
to that city slaves in great numbers, and these were the Slavi, or
people of the Russian States, whom the Germans made prisoners, and sold
to the Greek Emperors. M. Möller seems to be a man of great reading and
observation in his own line of study. The Cathedral of Mayence, he
added, is of the Byzantine order.

26th.—This morning one of the Landgrave’s officers, who is much employed
by him, and dines at the table every day, was married to the daughter of
the Landgrave’s Master of the Horse. He had been ennobled by the Emperor
of Austria at the request of the Landgravine, because if the young lady
had not married an “edelman,” or noble, she would have lost the portion
given to her by a Chapter to which she belongs. The Emperor signed the
letters of nobility, as a compliment, on the Landgravine’s birthday. The
wedding took place at the house of the lady’s father. After the
ceremony, her parents, according to the custom of the country,
surrounded the bride, and tied a handkerchief over her eyes. They then
took off her garland of myrtle and placed it on the head of the young
lady nearest to her, who happened to be her own sister. This is supposed
to prognosticate which is the young person who will be the soonest
married.

One day very much resembles another. This is the ordinary routine. At
seven the drum beats a réveil: a few minutes afterwards the stoves are
lighted. At half-past eight the servant brings hot water, and at nine,
coffee, boiled milk, a small white loaf, a piece of brown bread, a slice
of butter, a salt-cellar, and in a saucer ten small lumps of sugar. At
half-past eleven a message from the Landgravine to know how I have
slept, and if I should like to go out with her at a quarter or half-past
twelve. At which hour, if tolerably fine, we go out in a drosky, and
afterwards walk, returning home by a quarter before two, when the
trumpet sounds for dress. At two, it sounds again to serve up dinner. I
then go through a long passage, down twenty-five steps and up
twenty-five steps, which lead me to another long passage, and that to
the drawing-room, where I find two or three or more guests. The door
opens, and the gentleman esteemed the most considerable gives me his
arm. We walk into the dining-room, and stand still till the other door
is thrown open, when the grand maître d’hôtel, with a white wand and hat
in hand, enters, preceding the Landgrave and Landgravine, followed by
the aide-de-camp of the former and the maids of honour of the latter.
All sit down to table, the Landgrave having made me a sign to sit down
beside him on his left hand. On his right is the Landgravine, and next
to her one of his brothers—except when Princess Louise, their
sister-in-law, dines at table, for then she sits between the Landgrave
and Landgravine. Three or four times in the week the band plays during
dinner, after which the brother gives his arm to the Landgravine, and
the Landgrave his to me. During all these movements the ladies curtsey
and the gentlemen bow down to the ground. We walk into the drawing-room;
the Landgrave and his brother stand at one window; the Landgravine and
the ladies sit near another; the gentlemen stand at the other end of the
room, unless any one happens to be addressed by the Landgrave. Coffee is
served; after which the Landgrave and Landgravine leave the room, making
bows and curtseys, which are answered by profound bows from all present.
A maid of honour throws a shawl over the Landgravine’s shoulders and
walks after her, first turning to salute the company. The aide-de-camp
does the same, and follows the Landgrave, after which everybody retires.
The drum beats soon after as a salute to the Landgrave and Landgravine
as they drive out in a drosky, returning before six. About half-past six
the Landgravine sends for me. A servant with a lantern lights me down
stairs to her apartment, and I sit with her in her boudoir till eight
o’clock strikes. The servant then lights me through the passages and up
the twenty-five steps, and I arrive at the drawing-room, where I find a
maid of honour at the tea-table, and, about a quarter of an hour later,
the door flies open, and the Landgrave and Landgravine enter. The former
takes his tea, and then desires the card parties to be formed; he
playing at one table and the Landgravine at another. At a quarter before
nine the other door opens, and Prince Ferdinand, the Landgrave’s
youngest brother, comes in, and bows to the company. He walks up and
down and looks at the players, at a little distance; then sits down, and
then walks again. I sit at the corner of the Landgravine’s table. A few
minutes after, the drum beats for some time. At half-past nine the
aide-de-camp and a captain, who is always in waiting, come in with low
bows, and almost immediately afterwards a servant enters, goes up to the
grand maître, and announces supper. He is probably playing at the
Landgrave’s table, but, as soon as the game will permit, he rises, takes
his white wand and hat from the chair on which he had deposited them,
and comes up to the Landgravine’s table, where he stands till he catches
her eye. He then announces supper, makes a bow, and retires. As soon as
the parties break up, all go to supper, as before to dinner. The
Landgrave and Landgravine retire as soon as it is over; so do the
company; and a crowd of servants and kitchen-maids rush in to put out
the lights and carry away the plates and dishes. The guard is relieved
every two hours: at one, three, five, &c. At eleven at night a man blows
a horn eleven times, once at one, and three times at three. On Sundays
we dine at three. The Princes and officers all in full-dress uniforms,
and company, to the number of thirty to thirty-five, all full dressed.
On Mondays and Thursdays, the days for hunting, we dine at half-past
two.

In the latter part of December the Landgravine received a letter from
the Duchess of Gloucester, telling her that, on the 21st, the King
received the little Queen, or Princess, of Portugal, Donna Maria da
Gloria, at Windsor Castle, the apartments of which were fitted up with
great elegance and magnificence. The Duchess was there with the Duke,
and the Duke and Duchess of Clarence, the Duke of Wellington, &c. &c.
All thought the little Princess remarkably like poor Princess Charlotte,
though on a smaller scale. She is nine years and a half old, very fair,
with blue eyes. She was dressed like a young person of eighteen, and had
fine jewels, with her father’s portrait. She breakfasted with the King,
and behaved very properly.

[Miss Knight left Homburg on the 13th of January, and proceeded to
Louisburg, where she found the ladies and gentlemen of the Court still
grieving over the loss of the late Queen-Dowager. The Landgrave of
Hesse-Homburg died, almost suddenly, on the 3rd of March following.]

Stuttgard, Jan. 23rd.—Received a message from the King and Queen, asking
me to dine with them and meet the English Minister. At a quarter before
five I went to the palace, and at five we dined. Princess Pauline was
there, and the usual persons of the household, but no other company,
except Mr. and Mrs. Desbrowe. The Queen seemed much affected, and shed
tears in speaking of the late Queen-Dowager. The King spoke of her with
the highest esteem and the deepest gratitude. He said that during the
fourteen years which had elapsed since the death of his father, he had
never in one instance had reason to complain of his stepmother, but, on
the contrary, had always experienced from her the kindest and most
judicious conduct towards himself and his family. Princess Pauline was
very civil and very gay, for she is much pleased with the idea of her
approaching marriage with the Duke of Nassau.

February 25th.—Went to a ball at Court in the state apartments, which
are magnificent, and really elegant; the music good, and the rooms
perfectly well lighted. It was Princess Pauline’s birthday. The Duke of
Nassau was there, and, it seems, made her some fine presents on the
occasion. He is about thirty-six, not handsome, and rather short; but
apparently very good-natured, and not ill-looking. He was with the Duke
of Wellington at the battle of Waterloo. Prince Augustus was at the
ball. He goes into the army in about three months. I came away before
supper, but saw the tables set out in a very handsome style.

April 21st.—The Duke of Nassau arrived with his grand chamberlain and
two aides-de-camp. All are to be lodged at the palace. The
apartments—which, I think, are those of the late Queen-Dowager—are
dressed out with young trees, flowers, &c. The King and Queen have
invited me to the wedding, the dinner, and the Polonaise ball for
Thursday, but I have excused myself, from being still weak.[108]

23rd.—This day the Duke of Nassau was married to Princess Pauline. The
bride’s jewels are valued at 300,000 florins.

May 25th.—Dined with the King and Queen. There was no company, but some
of their household. They were very gracious, and I took leave of them
with feelings of sincere gratitude.

Baden, June 7th.—The weather improved, and the country in great beauty.
The theatre opens this evening with the opera of “Tancredi.” Nine
hundred and ninety-three strangers already arrived, though the “season”
has not yet commenced. Many new houses have been built since I was here
in 1824.

8th.—Walked in the afternoon up the hills, where the scenery is very
pleasing, and the grass ornamented with wild flowers. I went into the
garden of the Grand-Duchess, whose house stands on a little eminence.
Baden is composed of various hills, which render its situation very
picturesque, and the running rivulets from little cascades, added to the
magnificent oaks which enrich the scenery, form altogether a very
interesting picture. The shape of the hills does not compose so good a
background as might be wished, but the houses, though not of regular
architecture, are pretty and fanciful. Most of them have terraces, or
balconies, with flowers, and they are interspersed among the high trees
on the hills and hillocks.

July 1st.—Baden appears to fill daily. The Grand-Duchess Stéphanie
arrived this evening. It seems she was a niece of Count Beauharnais, the
first husband of Joséphine, and that Lady Bute (the wife of Sir James
Pulteney) took compassion on her, and had her educated in the south of
France. She was forced to go to Paris by Bonaparte, who also compelled
her to marry the Grand-Duke of Baden, against _her_ inclination and
_his_. Lady Bute left her 1000_l._ in her will, which Bonaparte would
not allow her to accept. The executors, however, placed it in the funds,
and she has since received it, with the accumulated interest, settling
both on her youngest daughter. She had two sons, who died, and has now
three daughters. She usually resides at Mannheim, but went this spring
to Paris to consult an oculist, and was well received by the King,
Dauphin, Dauphiness, &c. &c.

August 21.—The Russians are supposed to be by this time in possession of
Constantinople. By the last accounts they were within a few leagues of
that capital.[109] I remember my mother used to say, “Russia wants to
drive the only honest man out of Europe.”

[In the beginning of September, Miss Knight quitted Baden and travelled
by way of Zurich, Lucerne, Berne, Friburg, Geneva, Mont Cenis, and Susa,
to Turin. In that city she remained only a few days, and then continued
her route to Genoa, where she passed the ensuing winter. She here met an
old Roman acquaintance, Signor Gagliassi, who, after visiting her one
day, composed the following lines of doubtful gallantry:

            Salve, cui Noctis dedit Anglica patria nomen!
            Noctis, quam propriam docta Minerva vocat.
            Salve, quam vidi Romæ, Arcada! inter euntem,
            Et nunc in Liguri lætor adesse solo.

            Salve, quae pulchram ducens, viridemque senectam,
            Ævo et consilio fœmina Nestor eris!
            Accipe, quam scribo curru properante, salutem;
            Vota tibi rediens fervidiora feram.

This “epigramma” Miss Knight copied out and sent to a friend,
accompanied by the following verses:

                Gagliassi seems to think it strange
                  That I still breathe the air of life,
                And still abroad delight to range—
                  He says I might be Nestor’s wife.

                The compliment has made you stare,
                  And, I confess, has made me smile;
                But, could I Nestor’s wisdom share,
                  Such union might be worth the while.

                As Greece is all the fashion now,
                  To Pylos I my course might steer,
                And, should old Nestor make his bow,
                  There keep a Court and give good cheer.

                But Night, dark Night, is not my name;
                  I spring not from Minerva’s race;
                From Chivalry my lineage came;
                  Romance alone in me you trace.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER X.

GENOA—THE PALLAVICINI FAMILY—CHARACTER OF THE GENOESE—RETURN
  TO ENGLAND—THE ROYAL FAMILY AT BRIGHTON—LONDON—GLOOMY
  RETROSPECT—ANECDOTES.


                        JOURNAL CONTINUED—1830.


GENOA, January 1st.—The accounts of the weather from all quarters very
extraordinary. In London terrible fogs; at Paris the Seine frozen over;
at Turin and at Milan more snow than has ever been known before; and
here, a greater succession of north-east and north-west winds than can
be remembered for sixty years.

23rd.—The Prince of the Peace was at the Opera last night with his
wife.[110] He is on his way to Paris, where, not long ago, or at least
in the neighbourhood of Paris, died the Lady of the House of Bourbon,
whom he married, and it was reported that he had another wife. M. de B——
said that in Spain he was assured that the Prince had not been married
to this other lady, but that he had now married her. I remember meeting
a son of theirs at the house of a Spanish lady, at Paris, a few years
ago; and at Rome I heard that, in company with the King and Queen of
Spain, the Prince of Peace, with his daughter by the Lady of the House
of Bourbon, were arrived in Italy. The governor of this place, the
Marquis d’Hyène, has been greatly beloved wherever he has commanded. At
one place the good people wished to pay him particular attention, and,
among other decorations for his reception, had a transparency
representing a hyæna surrounded by little Cupids caressing it. To
explain the meaning of this, they

said to the Marquis d’Hyène: “Noi siamo gli amorini, e la bestià è
l’eccellenza vostra.”

In the memoirs of the Pallavicini family, it appears that a
nobleman[111] of that name went to England on a mission from the Pope to
receive money due to the Holy See, and that, after getting possession of
it, he became a Protestant, and appropriated the money to his own use.
His wife was with him, and after his death she married a son of
Cromwell, and returned with her second husband to Genoa, where they
inhabited the villa still belonging to the Pallavicini family, called La
Peschiera. If this be true, it must have happened during the short reign
of James II., for, otherwise, what hope could the Pontiff have of
getting money from England? It seems odd, however, that he should have
sent a secular, and a married one, too; but that might have been to
avoid exciting suspicion. I remember that when I was at Genoa, many
years ago, with my mother, we were told that a son of Cromwell had lived
in a villa over the Zerbino, a little way out of the gate. This answers
to the Pallavicini villa.

Genoa is sadly altered and degraded. Many of its finest buildings are
falling to decay, and the grass grows luxuriantly in their court-yards.
And yet trade flourishes more than ever. The principal nobility and
merchants are still very rich, and the King of Sardinia does all in his
power to render it a flourishing seaport and an agreeable residence. But
it is more difficult to make the Genoese amuse themselves than it is to
make them get money—the former implies spending it. There is great
inequality of fortune—great riches and great poverty.

April 27.—This day was celebrated, outside the gates, the feast of a
saint held in great veneration by the common people. On the eve there
were illuminations and fireworks, and the church was crowded with people
either from devotion or for the sake of amusement. They say that this
saint was once upon a time servant to a baker, and used to take a great
many loaves every morning for the poor. The baker missed his bread, and
suspected his servant. He watched her, and saw her go out with her apron
filled. On stopping her, he was much surprised, for he saw nothing but
flowers. This is celebrated as a miracle.

When Lord Exmouth was at Genoa, he took everything he could take, even
to the brass rings which received the chain of the port. How different
was this from the conduct of Lord Nelson and Sir Thomas Troubridge when
in the Mediterranean! _They_ came to rescue nations, and not to plunder
them.

It is said to be a custom here, that when a man is displeased with
another, as a token of resentment and defiance, he lets his whiskers
grow. Perhaps this may be the reason why the King expressed his
dissatisfaction with a young nobleman who allowed his whiskers to grow,
though he was not in the army. The young man cut them off, but is so
displeased that he will not go to Court.

The Marchesa Durezzo says, that of the lower classes in Genoa the most
courteous and good natured are the sailors, whom I have always heard
spoken of as the best seamen of the Mediterranean. There is a harshness
in the lower orders, and a stiffness in the higher classes of the
Genoese, which one does not meet with in other Italians. But they have
understanding and acuteness, and I believe that, in reality, they have
the affectionate heart peculiar to their common country—but you must get
at it.

[At the end of May, Miss Knight resumed her wanderings, halting,
however, at Turin until the middle of July. She thence proceeded to
Milan and across the Simplon to Geneva. Passing on by way of Neufchâtel,
she again entered France, and arrived at Dijon on the 12th of August,
under which date occurs the following entry: “The town was obliged to
illuminate last night in honour of the new King, Louis Philippe, being
proclaimed ‘Roi des Français.’ The people display no enthusiasm, and all
is quiet in this district. Several officers have resigned their
commissions. On the road I met some wounded Swiss and others of that
corps, and also of the Royal Guards, both of which corps are now
suppressed, and the men dismissed to their respective homes.” Three days
later, Miss Knight arrived in Paris, and on the 9th of September at
Dover. “On the road from Paris to Calais,” she remarks, “I perceived no
signs of gaiety or enthusiasm. A person disposed to criticise the nation
would, perhaps, divide it into three classes—knaves, dupes, and people
intimidated by their recollection of the horrid scenes of the former
revolution. Certain it is that the prosperity of France was great, and
yearly increasing, and now all has become precarious, thanks to
designing ambition and infamous journals. I am sick of the subject, and
what I did not write while in the country from prudence, I now avoid
writing from disgust.” In the following October, Miss Knight took
apartments at Brighton, where she was presented to William IV. and Queen
Adelaide, and invited to an evening party on the 21st, at which
“tableaux were represented by an actor from the theatre. The King and
Queen were very civil to everybody.” She was again invited on the 27th
of December, when “the Pavilion was lighted up and as hot as possible. I
cannot admire the dragons and other Oriental fancies, having been
spoiled for such things by being early accustomed to the dignified
simplicity of classic taste. Besides the two Princesses, the Duke of
Sussex was there, and some of the new Ministers, Lord Grey, Sir James
Graham, Lord Holland, and Lord Durham.” The last entry of the year runs
in these words: “A whale was caught near this place two days ago. It is
sixty-five feet in length. It was almost dead, and had a harpoon in its
body.” On the 28th of December, Miss Knight takes a gloomy retrospective
view of the events of the previous twelve months. “This miserable year,”
she writes, “is almost at its close. On the 26th of June, died George
IV., who was succeeded by William Duke of Clarence. On the 29th of July,
Charles X. lost his throne—the Dauphin as well as himself renouncing all
right to it. The Duke of Orleans was crowned by four marshals in a very
small assembly of the representatives of the nation, and without any
religious ceremony. No etiquette, no distinctions, allowed. Popular
tumults in France and England. The King and Queen of England deterred
from dining in the City owing to a communication from the Lord Mayor,
advising them of intended riots and the cutting of the gas-pipes. The
Duke of Wellington left in a minority, and obliged to resign: Lord Grey
and his party forming the new administration. The revolt of Belgium;
disturbances in many parts of Germany; the Duke of Brunswick expelled in
favour of his brother; the Grand-Duke Constantine and the Russians
driven out of Poland; fires in many counties in England to destroy the
haystacks and corn-ricks!”


                                [1831.]


Mrs. Fitzherbert, when William IV. visited her after his brother’s
death, showed him the papers which proved her marriage with the late
King, first by a Roman Catholic priest, and immediately afterwards by a
clergyman of the Church of England. The King desired her to put on
widow’s weeds. Mrs. Fitzherbert also showed these papers to the Duke of
Wellington, then Prime Minister. She is constantly invited to the
Queen’s parties, and is treated with much respect.

January 8.—Dined at General Egerton’s, and went in the evening with him
and Mrs. E. to a great party at the Pavilion. The Prince of Orange was
there. He came yesterday, and is to stay till the 10th. He has been some
time in England, and brought a letter to the King from his father,
requesting his Majesty to be kind to him, as he himself had forgiven
him. There was dancing, and some musicians from Bohemia played and sang.

February 14.—The King after dinner drank to the memory of the Earl of
St. Vincent, and of all the brave officers and men who fought on that
day and are now no more, and to the health of those who survive.

London, March 6.—The son of Murat lives in this (Dover) street. He
arrived lately from America, where he is naturalised, and practises at
the bar. He often visits his cousin Lady Dudley Stuart, the daughter of
Lucien Bonaparte. The Prince of Orange, I hear, is frequently at their
parties. Murat was at Lord Grey’s last night.

April 17.—Dined with the Duke and Duchess of Cumberland, at their
apartments in St. James’s Palace. The Landgravine was also there. The
apartments are handsome. On the ground floor a waiting-room, library,
and dining-room; and up-stairs, a large and superb drawing-room;
excellent bedchamber, dressing-room, &c. There are several
portraits—George III., Queen Charlotte, Mr. Pitt, two sons of the
Duchess, a bust of Goethe, &c. The dinner was very good, and well
served: all in the most proper style. The Duchess has excellent manners,
and Prince George, who came in at the dessert, with two young
companions, is really a delightful boy.

December 31.—This year has been one of the most painful to the feelings
of those who have been accustomed to the principles of social order and
morality, that I can remember. The French revolution in the last century
cannot be recalled to mind without horror, as every period of it was
marked by the most atrocious crimes, and a total contempt of morality
and religion. But the insidious duplicity, the want of faith, and
perversion of reason, which have brought about and coloured the progress
of that of 1830, threaten Europe with a total disorganisation of
political and moral principle. Alarm of every description is prevailing.
The ties of blood and of alliance are forgotten; and while it is
pretended that everything is being done for the maintenance of peace, no
security is given for the preservation of internal tranquillity. France
is still under the government of Louis Philippe and his Minister,
Casimir Périer; Belgium, under that of Leopold. Poland is reoccupied by
Russia. Italy, notwithstanding the efforts made to revolutionise her, is
still quiet, except, perhaps, in the three Legations, and they are kept
in awe by Austria.

[At the end of this lamentation, Miss Knight records various anecdotes
she had picked up in the course of the year, a few of which are worth
extracting.]

April 19.—Prince de Talleyrand wrote the other day to Louis Philippe,
who had been intriguing to get the throne of Belgium for his second son,
the Duke de Nemours: “Il faut que votre Majesté se rappelle qu’avant de
pouvoir mettre le pied en Brabant, il faut avoir le pied en Europe.”

The Duke of Orleans was always making unjust complaints of Louis XVIII.,
and one day went so far as to say to M. de B. that it was very unwise to
treat him in that manner, for, added he, “Je compte pour beaucoup en
France.” M. de B. answered: “Cela n’est pas possible, monseigneur, car
vous n’êtes ni brave, ni généreux;” and, turning his back on him, left
the room. The Duke from that time overwhelmed M. de B. with civilities
and flatteries.

Charles X. says that his conscience acquits him of having had anything
in view contrary to the good of his people, whose lives he wished to
spare, and whom he was only anxious to save from the artifices of
faction. He was made to believe that there would be twenty-nine thousand
troops in Paris, and that all would pass over quietly. The Dauphiness
still speaks with tender affection of her native country,
notwithstanding all she has suffered there. She said the other day to a
lady: “On nous calomnie cruellement; mais croyez-vous que l’histoire
nous rendra justice?”

The Grand-Duchess Helena is now (July) at Sidmouth, and her father,
Prince Paul of Würtemberg, is with her. An Irish family were presented
to her amongst others, when she said to them: “What are you doing here?
You ought to be in your own country, and spending your money there.”

Don Pedro, Duke of Braganza, ex-Emperor of Brazil, told a lady of very
high rank, who repeated it to me, that the misfortune of the present age
was that none of the sovereigns had a head to manage affairs.

One of the French papers says, that in the recent elections M. B., a
Royalist, has been chosen, at which it manifests great surprise, but
adds, that the department for which he had been elected had not attained
that degree of civilisation which excludes the idea of legitimacy. From
the well-known opinions professed by the journal in question, it cannot
be suspected of jesting on the subject.

Somebody having said in conversation that Ministers had advised his
Majesty to dismiss his household troops, a gentleman answered: “In that
case he should begin by dismissing the _Greys_.”

It is said Prince Leopold has been _forced_ to accept the crown of
Belgium. The expression is, “a pistol has been held to his throat, and
another to that of the King of Holland, to make the one accept and the
other resign, to avoid bringing England and Holland into collision.” We
are not, however, obliged to believe this. Louis Philippe has long had
great influence over Prince Leopold.

The King (William IV.) said the other day, in speaking of Don Pedro: “To
be sure, we are both sovereigns—at least, he _was_ one: but there is a
great difference between us for all that; for I am an honest man, and he
is a thief.”

A Frenchman, lately arrived in London, was asked if he had caught the
influenza: “Ah! non,” he replied; “je l’ai prise en grippe.”

Lady Talbot of Malahide is turned of ninety. She is of a very ancient
and distinguished family in Ireland, and, in gratitude for certain
favours bestowed, came over to the Coronation, and went also to the
following Drawing-room. I met one evening one of her sons, who is an
Admiral, with his niece, her grand-daughter, and they said she was not
in the least fatigued.

It has been discovered that four persons were sent from Paris to take
the life of the Duke de Bordeaux. Three of them went in separate
stagecoaches to Edinburgh, but they have been forced to return, and
additional sentinels have been placed at Holyrood. The child now does
not walk out with a servant as before, but only goes out in a carriage.
The fourth assassin does not seem to have been found out.

A stranger happening to be in Paris soon after the revolution of July,
1830, was stopped by a young chimney-sweeper, who asked him if he had
seen the King of the French. The other replied in the negative. “Would
you like to see him?” continued the chimney-sweeper. “Only give me a
piece of five francs and you shall see him.” The stranger agreed to do
so, and they went away together to the Palais Royal. As soon as they
were in sight of the balcony the boy began to call out, “Louis Philippe!
Louis Philippe!” in which cry he was joined by the rabble near him. The
King of the French came out to make his obeisance, and the gentleman
gave a five-franc piece to the sweeper. “Now,” said the boy, “if you
have a mind to hear him sing, only promise me five more, and you shall
be satisfied.” The stranger assented, and his Majesty, at the command of
the mob, joined in the Marseillaise Hymn, with all the appropriate
grimaces.

At the time when Louis Philippe was shaking hands with everybody in the
street, he held out his hand to a man, who said, “Stop a little.”
Thrusting both hands in the mud he offered them to the King, saying,
“Now they are fit for you.”

Thirty years ago Louis Philippe remarked: “Je n’aurai de paix que quand
je serai Roi de France.”

Since the shameful business of the lawsuit respecting the late Duke of
Bourbon’s will, they call Louis Philippe “Louis Filou.”

          Le peuple! c’est le peuple qu’on loue et qu’on blâme:
          Hélas! le bon peuple n’a ni raison ni tort:
          Corps sain et vigoureux, dont un héros est l’âme,
          Ou machine du traître agissant à ressort.

The young Duke de Bordeaux, while playing at ball, was accosted by a
Frenchman with many compliments, who told him he would certainly be
king. “La place est prise,” answered the boy. The man kept teasing him,
and at last said: “Mais j’ai envie d’assassiner celui qui a pris cette
place.” “Et moi,” replied the young Duke, “je le défendrai.” This was
said with an air of noble contempt, and he would not listen to anything
more the man had to say.

The Countess de N. says she knows from certain authority that Casimir
Périer in his ravings, during the last few days of his life, fancied
himself Charles X., and that he was constantly ordering to the block the
traitor Périer.

The Duke de B., who lived so many years on the most intimate terms with
Louis XVIII., declares, that the Memoirs published in his Majesty’s name
were never written by him, for he burnt all his papers a short time
before his death. He thinks they were revised by the Duke Decazes, but
written by a M. Capefigue, of Marseilles.

[During the year 1832, Miss Knight divided her time between Brighton,
Tunbridge Wells, London, Tottenham Park, Cheltenham, and Oxford. At the
close of the year she was again at Brighton. She sums up as follows the
events of the preceding twelve months: “What an eventful year! The
dreadful ravages of the cholera in many places, especially in London and
Paris, have carried off many well-known persons. Charles X. and his
suite left Scotland, attended by the blessings and regrets of the
inhabitants. He is now at Prague. The Duchess de Berri a prisoner in the
castle of Blois. The citadel of Antwerp, bravely defended by General
Chassé, compelled at length to surrender to Marshal Gérard. The combined
fleets of France and England, meanwhile, unable to approach the coast on
account of the weather. Affairs not yet settled. Prince Otho, of
Bavaria, now King of Greece, conveyed to the Piræus on board an English
ship of war!”]


                                [1833.]


[The greater part of the year 1833 was passed by Miss Knight in London,
but the only entry in her Diary worthy of notice is the following one:]

June 14th.—Dined at Lady Charleville’s, to meet Lady Charlotte Bury,
Miss Porter, Mr. Disraeli, Lord Oxmantown, Mr. Campbell, and others. In
the evening more company came. The manners of Miss Porter appeared to me
as pleasing and unassuming as her novels are natural and entertaining,
no less than well principled. Mr. Campbell, author of “The Pleasures of
Hope,” &c., is grown very large, and appears to be in ill-health. Mr.
Disraeli is an author, and the son of an author. He talked much of the
government of Syria, Egypt, &c. Among those who came in the evening was
Lady Morgan, but I had no opportunity of hearing her converse, as I came
away early.

[A few anecdotes are inserted at the close of the year, from which the
following are selected. The “local habitation,” assigned to the
oft-quoted grace on rabbits, is on the authority of the Princess
Augusta.]

The Duke of Richmond, great-uncle of the present one (recently
deceased), was very fond of hares and rabbits, especially the latter,
and used to have them constantly served at table, dressed in various
ways. His chaplain in ordinary, who used to sit near the lower end, was
not a little tired of them, more especially as by the time they came to
him they were often quite cold. So, being asked to say grace, he
recited:

              “Rabbits young, and rabbits old,
               Rabbits hot, and rabbits cold,
               Rabbits tender, rabbits tough,
               Thanks to Heav’n, we’ve had rabbits enough.”

Sir Herbert Taylor says that “The English are never so happy as when
they are discontented; the Irish never in such good humour as when they
are breaking heads; and the Scotch never so much at home as when they
are living upon others.”

Count de M., when Minister at Stockholm, was staying at the house of the
Count d’Uglas, after the Countess and his young daughter, who was in a
bad state of health, had left him on their way to Paris. One morning he
told the Count and Countess d’Uglas that he had passed a very
uncomfortable night, for that he had continually seen a kneeling figure,
sometimes on one, sometimes on the other side of his bed, and that,
though the back was turned to him, it perfectly resembled his daughter.
The impression was so strong upon his mind that he sketched the figure,
which, in fact, did resemble hers. On comparing dates, it afterwards
appeared that his daughter had died at that very time.[112]

An old woman, who died a few years ago in Ireland, had a nephew, a
lawyer, to whom she left by will all she possessed. She happened to have
a favourite cat, who never left her, and even remained by the corpse
after her death. After the will was read in the adjoining room, on
opening the door the cat sprang at the lawyer, seized him by the throat,
and was with difficulty prevented from strangling him. This man died
about eighteen months after this scene, and on his death-bed confessed
that he had murdered his aunt to get possession of her money.

Lord Nelson, writing to the Admiralty for supplies at a time when his
squadron stood in great need of them (in the year 1799, I think), said:
“We must have them from home, for Spain _would not_, Naples and Sicily
_could not_, and Sardinia _ought not_, to supply them.”


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XI.

ANECDOTES—TALLEYRAND—CHARLES ALBERT—Masséna—FERDINAND OF SPAIN—LORD
  WELLESLEY—ALFIERI—CHARLES X.—DEATH OF MISS KNIGHT.


[IN July, 1834, Miss Knight again crossed the Channel, and renewed her
acquaintance with many of her old friends in Paris, which she left for
Nice in the last week in October. Here she remained until the latter
part of July, 1835, when she proceeded to Turin. Some of the anecdotes
recorded in her journal, during this period of her life, though not all
new, are worth preserving.]

The young King of Naples [the late monarch], while reviewing his cavalry
the other day (September, 1834), was displeased at the manner in which
they performed their manœuvres, and, to punish them, led them to the
bank of a river, into which he plunged, swam his horse across, and made
them do the same, to their great astonishment.

A man, who squints very much, was talking to M. de Talleyrand about
public affairs, and wound up by saying: “Enfin, Prince, tout va de
travers.” To which the other replied: “Oui, monsieur, comme vous voyez.”

It is said that in a late debate which terminated in the resignation of
several of the Ministers, Lord Stanley handed over to Sir James Graham a
scrap of paper, on which he had written with a pencil: “Johnny will
upset the coach”—meaning, of course, Lord John Russell.

Some one having remarked to Talleyrand, when he was living on his estate
in banishment from the Court during the later years of Bonaparte’s
reign, that he must find the life he led “bien monotone,” the Prince
replied: “Monsieur, le monotone fut le berceau de la vie.”

Sir Edward Sugden, a celebrated lawyer who has lately come into
Parliament, having heard that he had been turned into ridicule for being
the son of a hairdresser, made answer: “So I am, and I am come into the
House to give a dressing to the Whigs.”

Sir Walter Scott told Mr. Howard, of Corby, that the only verses David
Hume ever wrote were made at an inn in that neighbourhood. They were as
follows:

                  Chickens in eggs at breakfast sprawl;
                  Godless boys God’s glory squall;
                  Scotchmen’s heads adorn the wall;
                  Corby’s walks atone for all.

These lines were probably written soon after the affair of ’45, and I
suppose the “Scotchmen’s heads” were exposed on the walls of Carlisle.

Mr. Howard was one day at a great dinner party which the late Duke of
Norfolk gave to several of his neighbours. He sat at the bottom of the
table, the Duke being at the head, and one of the gentlemen who sat near
the Duke called out to him and said: “Mr. Howard, will you drink a glass
of wine with me? There was a connexion between our families.” “With a
great deal of pleasure, sir,” replied Mr. H., “though I don’t know
exactly what the connexion is; but in this county there have been
several marriages between neighbours.” “Why, sir,” resumed the
gentleman, “your ancestor, Lord William Howard, hung up twenty-three out
of twenty-seven of my family, and you must own that was _a tie_.” This
reminded me of an anecdote I heard at Brighton. General Dalrymple, who
was between ninety and a hundred years of age, was introduced by the
King to Lord Errol as an old friend. “Ah! my Lord,” said the General,
“the last of your family I have seen was Lord Kilmarnock’s head on
Temple-bar.”

An English lady at Paris, who was obliged to have an arm taken off, six
months afterwards married the surgeon who performed the operation. On
which a French gentleman remarked “Elle lui a donné la main pour lui
avoir coupé le bras.”

The King of Sardinia (Charles Albert) is very kind and obliging to the
French Royalists who are at Turin. The Duke de F——, with whom he is
connected, has an employment about the Court—he had been severely
wounded, and lost a leg in the affair of the Three Days. The King heard
that the Duke was anxious to visit the King and Royal Family at Prague,
but that his finances were not favourable to so long a journey. His
Majesty, therefore, thought of an expedient which would enable the Duke
to gratify his loyalty, without his feelings being wounded. “Duke,” he
said, “would you do me the favour to choose some horses for me (at such
a place) in Bohemia; and as your best way will be through Prague, of
course you will pay your respects to the Royal Family there.” As the
journey was on the King’s service, the Duke could feel no reluctance
about having his expenses paid.

The Countess de B. told me the other day that her mother was once
remarking to Cardinal Costa, a very clever man, that she could not help
feeling indignant at the conduct of certain Ministers as being without
good faith or probity. “Ah, ma chère dame,” he replied, “quand il s’agit
de la politique, il faut se rappeler que ce ne sont pas des gens
baptisés.”

Masséna was a native of the county of Nice; when he was here after the
Restoration he told a story of what happened to him once when he had the
command of the French army in Spain. Early in the morning of an expected
battle he walked through the camp, disguised by a soldier’s cloak, that
he might judge of the disposition of his men. He heard three of them
talking together about the forthcoming engagement. One said: “Ah! I hope
I shall get a pair or two of stockings, for mine are worn out.” Another
wished for the acquisition of a couple of shirts, as his own were in
rags. Turning to the third, they said: “And what do you want? You say
nothing.” The young man answered: “What do I care about stockings and
shirts? I want to do something that will get me the cross of the Legion
of Honour, and then I may rise like our general to be an officer and a
marshal of France, for he began like myself as a ‘pauvre gredin.’”

Many stories are told respecting the death of Ferdinand (of Spain) and
his will. Some say that he had signed a codicil revoking his disposal of
the crown, and restoring Don Carlos to his rights; but that the Queen,
on her return from hunting, finding him dead, and having been told of
the codicil, sought for it in his secrétaire and in the drawers of a
table where he kept papers. Being unable to find the secret place in
which it was deposited, she ordered the two pieces of furniture to be
burned. Others go still further, and pretend that, had she been brought
to bed of a son, Ferdinand would have lived _a little longer_, &c. &c.
It must, however, be remembered, that where great personages are
concerned, and party spirit prevails, there are many inventions. The
character of Don Carlos is certainly that of an honest man, even by the
account of his enemies. I recollect hearing the late Duke of Gloucester
say that Mina told him that, although he was not himself of the party of
Don Carlos, he believed him to be the honestest man of the family.

I forget who told me the following anecdote of the Marquis of Wellesley,
when Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland. He was at table with a party of Irish
gentlemen who were chiefly Orangemen, and in the dining-room hung a
painting of the battle of the Boyne, which in that country is usually
called the Victory of Boyne Waters. The company wishing him to pronounce
an opinion, invited him to change his seat. “Surely, my Lord,” said one,
“you would not turn your back on Boyne Waters?” Lord Wellesley answered,
pointing to a bottle of claret that stood before him: “Oh, I never look
at water when I can get wine.”

Count Alfieri, one morning, as he was sitting with the Countess of
Albany, was informed that Napoleon had just issued orders for several
children of the first families of Florence, as of other great cities of
Italy, to be sent to Paris to serve as his pages, and afterwards enter
the army. One asked, “What could be done?” Another, “How could it be
avoided?” A third remarked, “If they go, their principles will be
perverted, and they will be estranged from their country; and if they
are not sent, their parents will be persecuted, ruined, imprisoned. What
_is_ to be done with them?” Alfieri suddenly exclaimed, with great
energy, “Ammazzarli!”[113]

[At Turin Miss Knight remained throughout the entire year 1836, the
political events of which she sums up in a few lines. “This year,” she
writes, “has been fruitful in events. Spain and Portugal in commotion,
and now three parties in the former. In France an attempt to assassinate
Louis Philippe; and young Louis Napoleon Bonaparte arrested at
Strasburg, for his mad attempt to gain the throne—a plot supposed to
have an extensive ramification. Death of Charles X., at Goritz. Loss of
the French at Constantine. Great political disputes in England, and
violent party spirit. A dreadful hurricane felt there, in Holland, and
some other countries. Great inundations in France.” There are several
miscellaneous anecdotes, however, recorded in her journal, which are not
without interest.]

At a ball given by Count M., at Vienna, the French Ambassador, M. de St.
Aulaire, expressed to the Countess his great admiration of a coronet of
diamonds she had on her head. “Ah! quelle belle couronne, Madame la
Comtesse!” “Au moins,” she replied, “elle n’est pas volée.”

It has been remarked that during the long series of Princes of the House
of Savoy, neither assassinations, nor family quarrels of any political
consequence, nor acts of unjust usurpation, have stained the annals of
their history; an observation that could not be justly applied to any
other royal family now possessed of European thrones, or to any other
list of European sovereigns. The far greater number of these Princes of
Savoy have been good monarchs, and many of them distinguished for their
bravery and military talent.

It is said that Tasso conceived his beautiful idea of the Garden of
Armida from the views in the neighbourhood of Turin, and particularly
from the spot where stands the “vigna,” or villa, of Sir Augustus
Foster. The garden which is said to have inspired him with the original
conception is supposed to have been what is now called the Old Park.
Tasso was on a visit to the Duke of Savoy.

A celebrated surgeon, named Livois, who was in the French army, took
compassion on a dog whose leg had been fractured by a shot during the
siege of some place or another. He set the bones, and cured him. Some
time afterwards he found waiting at his door the same dog, with a
companion who had a broken leg, and whom he evidently wished to
introduce to him. The surgeon cured this second dog also, and mentioned
the circumstance to the Countess du C., who repeated it to me.

Charles X., who expired at Goritz, in Styria, in the night between the
5th and 6th of November, 1836, had entered upon the eightieth year of
his age in the preceding month. He was active and cheerful to the moment
at which he was seized by the fatal malady which closed his mortal
existence in less than thirty hours. During this time he suffered
greatly, but died tranquil and resigned, forgiving his enemies, those
who had injured him, and those who had been misled. He had visited the
Princess of B. and his nephews, the sons of Don Carlos, on his way to
Goritz, where he was about to establish himself with his family. The 4th
of November, St. Charles’s day and his own fête, he had celebrated with
a few friends, and he had been received with great cordiality by the
inhabitants of Goritz.

It has always appeared to me that Charles X. was the true model of a
gentleman. He was agreeable, unaffected, and amiable in the best sense
of the word, and an affectionate and faithful friend. His look came from
the heart, and what he said, however gratifying, could not be suspected
of flattery. If in his youth he was gay, his conduct in mature age was
respectable, without prejudice or ostentation. His piety was sincere and
fervent; and, without presumption, I think we may venture to say that he
has made a blessed exchange. The Duchess of Hamilton told me that he
said to her at Holyrood, speaking of the Revolution of 1830: “I meant
well; therefore I lay my head down peaceably to rest.”

A banker having observed that one of the ladies whom we call
“exclusives” always bowed most graciously to him when she took money at
his bank, but did not return his bow when he passed her in the street,
one day, when he met her, took out a gold piece of twenty francs, and
presenting it to her, said: “C’est un peu cher, mais je serais bien aise
d’avoir un bon salut.”

In the island of Sardinia there are many persons who live in the
mountains, chiefly in the open air, for they have no habitations, but
sometimes seek refuge in caves. They are remarkably brave, active, and
revengeful, bearing animosity against those with whom they are at
variance from father to son. They are called banditti, and are
punishable by the laws of the Piedmontese Government when they can be
caught, but they do not attack travellers, nor commit any robberies.
Some of them, it seems, lived not very far from the castle of the
Marquis de B., and between eight and nine one evening, while he was at
table, his butler whispered to him that one of their chiefs, whose name
he knew, wished to speak to him. He ordered him to be shown into his own
room, and then went to him. He was a man between forty and fifty years
of age, but his hair, including a long beard, was already quite grey. He
was armed with pistols, dagger, and musket, and had with him a dog, as
had also each of his companions. These were four in number, and one of
them, a young man of twenty-one, remarkably handsome. The chief pressed
the hand of the Marquis, and said that he trusted to his honour, and was
sure he would not betray him, but that he wished to ask him to obtain,
if possible, their pardon. The Marquis could not promise this, but
assured him he should not be betrayed. “If he were,” cried one of his
companions, “we would defend him to the last, and even die with him.”
The Marquis gave orders to his butler to invite them to supper, which
they readily accepted. They sat down, each with his dog by his side,
but, before they would touch anything, the chief said to the butler, “I
must beg you to begin; not that I expect any treachery here, but some of
our companions were poisoned at a supper. Pray excuse me.” The butler
complied; and when they had finished their meal they retired, with many
thanks. At a short distance from the castle a large party of this tribe
were posted on a slight eminence to protect their friends. When the
Marquis left the castle he saw them there, and they cried out to him,
“Buon viaggio!” This happened in June, 1836.

The Sardinian gentlemen and ladies speak Italian, but they have also a
dialect which, of course, is that of the common people: it is said to be
a mixture of Spanish and Arabic. In their persons they mostly resemble
the Spaniards. The country is picturesque, but roads and inns are still
wanting. It appears to be the intention of the Piedmontese Government to
render Sardinia similar to the States of Italy, but it will require much
time to ascertain the inclinations of all classes for the new mode of
existence.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[On the 14th of June, 1837, Miss Knight took leave of her numerous
friends in Turin, and set out for Paris, where she arrived on the
22nd—“longæ finis chartæque viæque.” Her wanderings and her journals
were alike approaching their termination. The last entry in her Diary
was made on the 4th of December, and refers merely to the visits she
made that day. Two days afterwards she was taken ill, and on the 17th of
December, 1837, she closed her long and well-regulated life, in the 81st
year of her age.]


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  EXTRACTS FROM MISS KNIGHT’S JOURNAL.


[The following passages are extracted from Miss Knight’s Diaries. They
illustrate the Autobiographical Memoir in the first volume. The
narrative would have been impeded by their insertion there; but they are
of sufficient interest to form a welcome addition to the more continuous
story of Miss Knight’s life.]


                               ROME—1781.


December 30.—At eight in the morning we went to the church of St. Louis
to see the consecration of Monseigneur l’Abbé de Bernis as Bishop of
Apollonia. A little before nine the Cardinal, the Abbé, and Monsignore
de Bayane arrived, the organ playing as they entered, and soon after
they went to the door to receive the Pope, whom they followed into the
church, the organ playing, and the choir singing “Ecce Sacerdos Magnus.”
The Pope, the Cardinal, and the new Bishop then went and prayed at the
altar in the chapel of St. Louis; after which they walked up into the
choir, where the Pope again prayed at the great altar. The Bishop was
then presented to him and kissed his feet, and the Pope embraced him.
The Cardinal de Bernis stood beside a small altar prepared for the
Bishop on his left hand, and by his side were Monsignori Onesti, Doria,
Stacy, Bayane, and other prelates, who now proceeded to dress the Pope.
Cardinal de Bernis brought him the napkin to wipe his hands, and took it
again from him. In the mean while the two assisting Bishops (the
Archbishop of Athens, the Pope’s almoner, and the Bishop of Carpentras)
had the new Bishop dressed, whose robes were very fine, white and gold,
with white buskins, having a cross embroidered on them, &c. &c. He was
then again presented to the Pope, and seated in a chair opposite to his
Holiness, who read to him the Articles of Faith and the duties of a
Bishop. After every interrogative, he had to answer and make a
genuflexion. After this, the Pope anointed his hands and the tonsure at
the top of his head, for which purpose a bandage was tied round his
head, and another over his hands fastened round the neck—he himself
kneeling all the time. The Pope afterwards put the cross on him, the
mantle, and the ring (a very beautiful one); when he prostrated himself
before the great altar and made his profession of faith and his vows as
a Bishop. He then rose, and the Pope gave him his benediction, put a
gold mitre on his head, and, placing the crosier in his hand, seated him
in his own chair before the great altar, himself standing beside him,
and the Bishops, who never quitted him, standing on the other side.
Those wore mitres of white cloth, which alone are permitted to be worn
in the Pope’s presence except by a new Bishop. Monseigneur de Bernis now
rose, made a reverence to the Pope, and asked permission to give his
benediction, which his Holiness granted, telling him only to go on the
other side, that it might not fall upon him (the Pope). He then came
down the church, giving the benediction, with his Bishops on each hand,
and returned again to his chair at the great altar, the canons of the
church singing the “Te Deum.” The Pope next gave him the Kiss of Peace,
which went round to the two other Bishops; after which he was seated
opposite the Pope, who delivered a discourse (called a homily)
thirty-five minutes in length. In this he made compliments to the
Cardinal de Bernis and the Bishop, who both rose and bowed in
acknowledgment. He also gave a geographical description of Apollonia,
and said it was probably so called from there having been a temple there
dedicated to Apollo. He remarked how lamentable it was that it should be
in the hands of infidels, but he did not intend to send the Bishop
there, but only to Alby, which he must consider as another Apollonia.
When he named St. Peter and St. Paul, he beat his breast, and sighed
most vehemently. As soon as he had finished, the Cardinal went up and
thanked him, and the Bishop did the same, adding that he hoped to acquit
himself of his duty in the manner he desired. The Pope replied that he
had no doubt about it; gave a general benediction, and went to a chapel,
where he said another mass. In the mean time all the prelates, &c.,
congratulated the Cardinal and Monseigneur, after which his Eminence
embraced his nephew in the most affectionate manner. The Pope having now
finished his mass, the Cardinal accompanied him out, and shut the door
of his carriage, while the Bishops, &c., kneeled down, and the ceremony
thus terminated.

In one of the tribunes over the choir were three Cardinals, and in the
opposite one the Pope’s niece and the foreign Ministers. The organ
gallery was allotted for the French, English, and other strangers, but
it was too far removed for them to see much. Most of the French and
English gentlemen stood beside the balustrade of the choir, and we were
in a grated tribune erected for the purpose, with the Princess
Rezzonico, the Duchess of Lanti, Marchesa Castiglioni, a Milanese, and
other ladies. The Pope ranted like a country comedian in the part of
_Othello_. Cardinal de Bernis acted his part with his usual dignity,
sense, and goodness, and Monseigneur de Bernis went through his
fatiguing office with the decency of a good Christian and the propriety
of a man of fashion, without affectation, negligence, or
bigotry—extremes which appear to me very difficult to avoid in the midst
of such a mockery of religion. The Maggiordomo, at the Pope’s expense,
gave a grand dinner on the occasion, to which he invited the Cardinals
of the palace, the Senator, the Ministers connected with France, and the
principal Roman Princes, to meet the Cardinal and Monseigneur. The
latter presented twelve crowns for a dinner to the Canons of St. Louis,
three sequins each to the under people of the church, a crown to the
sweepers, and half-a-crown to the domestics, besides five sous each to
all the poor who were present.


                               ROME—1782.


On the morning of the 6th of January, Monseigneur de Bernis went to St.
Peter’s, where he stood amongst the other Bishops till the Pope called
him to the foot of the throne. This ceremony is styled making the
“Vescovi assistenti al Soglio,” who are always seated on the steps of
the Pope’s throne, and assist him on public occasions. This honour
entitles Monseigneur to the privilege of making three Prothonotaries and
eight Knights of the Golden Spurs. He intends to give one of these
golden spurs to Belcour, his valet-de-chambre, and the others to some of
the Cardinal’s people. Cournau, his Eminence’s maître d’hôtel, already
possesses this distinction. Monseigneur de Bernis is likewise entitled,
in virtue of this dignity, to send every morning to the palace for his
bread and his wine, which he gives to his valet-de-chambre. The bulls
for this ceremony cost him 150 crowns.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Grand-Duke Paul and his Duchess arrived at Rome under the names of
Count and Countess of the North, and with them one of her brothers, a
Prince of Würtemberg. Madame de Beckersdorff and two maids of honour
were also with them, and the first seemed to be her intimate friend, and
a very pleasing person. The Grand-Duke, though not tall, had a good
figure, but his face was Calmuck. His manners were good, and he talked
agreeably to those who were introduced to him. The Grand-Duchess was,
like most of her family, very handsome. She was tall, her figure
majestic, and her features and complexion very fine. Her manners were
dignified and gracious. We were introduced to them at a concert given by
the Cardinal de Bernis for the birth of the Dauphin. Princess D.,[114]
who had been staying some time at Rome with her son and married
daughter, came to the fête dressed in black. She was considered by the
Grand-Duke and Duchess as a spy on their proceedings; and, at all
events, the part which she was supposed to have taken in the
imprisonment and death of the Grand-Duke’s father must have rendered the
sight of her very painful to them. Unmindful of this, she seated herself
at the concert as near as possible to the Grand-Duke, just behind him to
the right. He was greatly annoyed, and, turning towards her, said:
“Madame, on ne vient pas habillé en noir à la fête d’un souverain.”
Princess D. gave as an excuse the assurance that, as she was about to
leave Rome, all her other dresses were packed up. The Grand-Duke
replied: “On peut toujours rester à la maison.”

The Princess was a short, fat, middle-aged woman, with a very red face
and harsh countenance; and the broad red riband and star, which she wore
in the way such decorations are worn by men, added to her formidable
appearance. It is said she was only eighteen years of age when the death
of the Emperor Peter took place, and that, seated at a table with two
pistols before her, she waited for the news with the intention, if it
proved contrary to her wishes, of killing the messenger with one and
herself with the other.[115] Pistols, we were told, she always carried
about with her; and, notwithstanding the services she had rendered to
the Empress Catherine, and the strange masculine honours conferred upon
her in return—such as this decoration, and her being made President of
the Academy of Sciences—it is evident that her absence was more
agreeable to her Imperial mistress than her presence would be, for she
was many years in England, Scotland, and Italy. She would not allow her
daughter to live with her husband, and she used to lock up her son, who
must have been turned of twenty, every night. How unlike to her amiable
and excellent brother. It is said that she had a sister who was
gentleness itself. One would wish to think that Princess Dashkoff was in
some measure misrepresented. I recollect saying something to her son,
with whom I was a little acquainted, about the maids of honour attending
on the Grand-Duchess, and I naturally expressed myself in the terms,
“the ladies of the Grand-Duchess.” The young man, who just before had
been talking to me with the civility usually shown to a young woman,
suddenly reddened, and looked quite savage. “Madame,” said he, “the
Grand-Duchess has no ladies; she has no right to have any. They are the
ladies of our august sovereign, who allows them to attend upon the
Grand-Duchess in her travels.” Does not this put one in mind of a remark
made by Bonaparte: “Pour peu qu’on y gratte on trouve le Tartare?”

We paid our respects to the Grand-Duke and Duchess, as did all the
company at Rome, at their own apartments. They seemed much pleased with
all they saw, and with the society. After Princess D. left, they were
perfectly at their ease. There was at that time no Russian Ambassador,
or Minister, at Rome. I afterwards heard that they were not so
comfortable at Naples.

A tailor at Rome made a coat for the Grand-Duke. When he brought it home
the sleeves were found to be too long. “I suppose,” said the Prince,
“you have heard that kings have long arms; but mine as yet are only
rags.” He and the Grand-Duchess appeared to be very domestic, and liked
to talk of their children. I remember the Grand-Duchess showing us
portraits of some of them _en silhouette_. Her dress was very
magnificent at Cardinal de Bernis’ fête. It was white, trimmed with the
most valuable sables, over which hung large pearls in garlands, fastened
with diamond knots of great size and splendour.

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the 1st of March we went to Cardinal de Bernis’. On account of the
fêtes given by him in honour of the birth of the Dauphin, torches and
guards were placed at the corners of all the streets leading to his
house. The front and both sides of his palace were illuminated with four
immense wax-lights in each window, which made a most brilliant
appearance. All the carriages went in by the back way, none being
permitted to pass in front of the palace, as opposite to it and before
the church of St. Marcel an elegant amphitheatre had been erected for
music, for the amusement of the populace; the decorations were very
pleasing, and had a delightful effect from the windows. The rooms were
all decorated in a festal manner, with a great deal of gilding and many
looking-glasses; the gallery with trophies on a gold ground, and the
ceiling with fleurs-de-lys and dolphins. At the end of the gallery,
within the columns, was an amphitheatre for the musicians, who were all
in uniform. An infinite number of lights, perfectly well arranged, were
scattered about, and two rows of seats were placed round both rooms for
the company. As we were going up-stairs we met the cardinal, attended by
his gentlemen, servants, &c., with eight torches and eight candles,
going to receive the Grand-Duke and Duchess, for whom chairs had been
placed across the gallery between the columns. The Princess of
Palestrine, who did the honours of the Cardinal’s house, seated herself
beside them for a short time, but after a while gave her place to the
Pope’s niece. The Cardinal stood behind the Grand-Duchess, as also did
Monseigneur de Bernis. The Prince of Würtemberg would not sit down, but
stood beside the Cardinal. The lady who accompanies the Grand-Duchess,
with the two maids of honour, were placed near, but there was an immense
crowd. Immediately afterwards began the cantata, which lasted an hour.
The poetry of it—in honour of the Dauphin—was composed by a secretary of
the Pope’s nephew, and the music by a Maestro di Capella of the Pope.
The Grand-Duke and Duchess were very attentive, and after refreshments
had been offered to them, which they declined, they went and sat down in
the next room, whither most of the company followed them. Soon after we
were seated the Cardinal brought the Grand-Duke up to us, and presented
us in the most affectionate manner. He then presented the Duchess
Bobadilla and another lady who sat beside us, but the Grand-Duke
immediately returned to us and entered into conversation, until he was
called off by two letters being brought to him by express. He talked to
us in the most polite and attentive manner, and expressed a desire for
us to visit Russia. Upon our mentioning that we were acquainted with
Admiral Knowles, he inquired with great affection after Miss Knowles and
Sir Charles, and said he had much regretted the Admiral’s departure.
When we told him that the son was a captain in the navy, he remarked
that the post of captain in the English navy was a most respectable
rank, with many other things that showed equally his sense and
good-breeding. He speaks French perfectly well. They went away soon
afterwards, when we returned into the gallery and heard some very good
music, and did not get home till past twelve. On the following night
there was, if possible, more company than on the previous one, and
everything still more in gala. The Grand-Duke and Duchess came early,
and were placed as before, only they made the Princess of Palestrine sit
between them, and, when she went into the next room, the Cardinal de
Bernis. They were exceedingly pleased, and made themselves very
agreeable. The cantata was written by the same author as the other, but
the music was by Cimarosa, and infinitely finer. They stayed to hear two
other pieces of music, and then passed into the other room, where they
remained till near ten. The Grand-Duchess was elegantly dressed, and
looked exceedingly well: the Grand-Duke wore a plain coat with superb
diamond buttons. I sat by the lady who accompanies the Duchess, and
found her very agreeable: she is a German. The music lasted till after
eleven, and was very fine. The palace and the street in front of it,
with the orchestra opposite, were as light as day. The Academy of France
was also lighted up, and had an orchestra in the same manner. On the
Sunday before, all the money sent by the King of France to pay for this
fête was given away by the Cardinal in doweries—fifty crowns each to one
hundred and fifty brides in Rome, and twenty-five crowns each to two
hundred at Albano. The Bishop of Apollonia administered the Sacrament,
and handed the orders to them to receive the money at once, instead of
waiting till they were married, as is usually the case. At a little
after six on the next day we went to pay our respects to the Grand-Duke
and Duchess, and found there the Princess Doria, the Princess Santa
Croce, and another lady, with the German lady, the friend of the
Duchess. The Cardinal de Bernis and several other gentlemen were also
there. We went immediately into the next room, where the Grand-Duchess
received us at the door, the Grand-Duke standing behind her. She told my
mother that she had saluted her the night before, and had curtseyed
twice, adding, very politely, that as her husband had made our
acquaintance, she also much wished to do so. She then had chairs placed
round, and desired us all to be seated. She chatted much about Rome, and
told Cardinal de Bernis that she would never leave it were it not for
her children. The Grand-Duke came and talked to us for some time with
the greatest good-humour and affability. The Duchess was very desirous
that the gentlemen likewise should sit down, and told a gentleman who
accompanies them, and whom she calls “Mon Général,” to set them the
example. When we took our leave, she assured my mother that she should
be always very happy to see us; that her husband was so pleased with
making our acquaintance, that she was likewise very anxious for it, &c.
&c. In short, nothing could be more flattering and attentive than their
reception of us. They appear very much attached to one another.[116] The
Duchess’s figure is certainly very fine, and improves upon one, while
the Grand-Duke is so genteel and pleasing in his manners, that his
person seems to me at present far from disagreeable.

On the 14th we went to take leave of the Count and Countess of the
North. They received us with the greatest goodness. The Count told me he
regretted infinitely that we had not met oftener; that our visit then,
though it made him happy, was rather a pain than a pleasure; that it was
not their fault they had not seen us every day, but as there were so
many things to see they usually returned home too late to receive
company, and could not make an exception to a general rule, or they
would have received us at any time; that he had inquired whether we were
at the concert at Princess Doria’s, and would have come to us, but the
devil of etiquette prevented him. He pressed exceedingly that we should
go to St. Petersburg, saying his house and the whole city should be at
our disposal. I then ventured to say that, if we were not so happy as to
travel so far, my mother hoped that the Count and Countess of the North
would permit us to take the liberty of requesting their interest with
the Grand-Duke and Duchess for any of our English sea officers who, if
there was a peace in our distracted country, might be ambitious of
serving in Russia. He replied that they had some credit with those
personages, and nothing would make him happier than to be of service to
us, or to any of our friends; that my mother and I had only to write to
him and mention how far they were in our esteem, and he would treat them
accordingly, as he was sure my mother knew the Navy too well, and was
too nice to recommend any who were not deserving. “Believe me,” he
added, “_upon my honour_ I wish nothing more than to be useful to you. I
beg you will be assured of my sincerity, and I hope you will soon put it
to the proof. But if it should be ten or twenty years’ hence, you may be
equally sure of it, for I could not forget you even if I were inclined
to do so; and I am certain that if I were not in the world, the Countess
would do the same. I think power is never so agreeable as when it can
make one useful to one’s friends, and, as such, I desire you will ever
consider us.” He repeatedly urged us to go to St. Petersburg; and upon
my remarking how difficult it was to travel in time of war, he said, war
had nothing to do with our going there, because even if there was a war
in Russia, it could not be one disagreeable to us. He added, that when
he was master of himself there was nothing he would not do for us, but,
as it was, he could be of some use to us in St. Petersburg. The Countess
was also excessively kind to us, and pressed us strongly to go to
Russia, and, indeed, said the most obliging and flattering things. She
bade me draw everything at Rome as fast as possible, and meet them at
St. Petersburg—with many more of the kindest expressions. She said it
gave her great pain to go away just as she was beginning to make
acquaintances, and that she should have wished to have cultivated a
friendship with Cardinal de Bernis and with us; that she had but small
hopes of meeting him again, but would always retain a regard for him. As
for us, she said she would not give up the idea of again seeing us, and
that she should quit us with tears in her eyes, adding the most
affectionate expressions of kindness. The persons who accompany the
Count and Countess are all perfectly well chosen. The maids of honour
are both well behaved and good natured, and the General’s lady is very
amiable.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Pope mentioned one night at supper that the “barcarole” that brought
him from Venice had since gained three hundred crowns, at half a
baioccho from each person, by letting people kiss the place where he was
seated, adding: “Quanto mi piace di vedere la fede di questi buoni
Veneziani!” He also said that one of his gloves having fallen from his
hand was instantly cut into a thousand pieces for relics.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Pope having lately found an obelisk, has had it removed to Monte
Cavallo, where it is to be placed between the two statues. The expense
and trouble were no slight matter. The other day the following
inscription was placed on it: “Fac ut lapides isti panes fiant.”
Infinite pains were taken to discover the author and have him punished,
and on the following morning was written beneath the other: “The author
is St. Luke, chap. iv. 3.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Pope stayed two nights and a day at Cesena, and ordered his bed to
be placed in the room in which he was born. His people were so little
used to travelling, that they forgot the chocolate-cup, and, after much
searching in the town where they happened to be, they told the Pope
there was not one to be got fit for his use. “Well, then,” said he,
“give me the chocolate in a pipkin.” When the Pope wanted to change his
linen, the valise in which it was packed happened to be two hours behind
on the road. The baggage-cart broke down, and, it seems, caused the
oddest confusion ever beheld, mitres and chalices tumbling about amongst
pots and pans. It resembled the furniture of a playhouse, and a
gentleman remarked that the Pope was a good actor, and was now removing
his theatre to Vienna. He is a strolling player, then, said another.
Some one expressing a certain curiosity as to the sort of honours the
Emperor would show the Pope at Vienna, a bystander replied: “He will
probably dispense with Lent, and give his Holiness a masked ball.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Princess Dashkoff being with other strangers in the gallery of the
Senate-house at Venice, where it is not permitted to open the door after
the sitting commences, insisted upon going out, exclaiming aloud, “Ces
perruques m’ennuient.” She made so much noise that the senators sent up
to desire her to be quiet, but she only repeated that “she _would_ go
out.” Upon this, one of the senators said: “Gentlemen, shall we have a
ballot to see whether this mad woman shall go out or not?” It was then
put to the vote and carried in the affirmative, and, the door being
opened, the Princess went out by herself.

                  *       *       *       *       *

There is a negro woman at Rome much protected by the Queen of Portugal.
She is dressed in red, and goes about with a Madonna in a box, asking
alms for founding a monastery in Portugal for negro girls under the
protection of the father and mother of St. Joachim. She went to the Pope
to ask his permission, and mentioned the saints who were to be the
patrons of her order. The Pope answered, that he had no doubt but what
the father and mother of St. Joachim were good people, but they were not
on his list.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A Cardinal’s cook in time of Lent having made up all his “maigre” dishes
with the gravy and fat of meat, went to confession, and, among other
sins, mentioned this one. The confessor, however, refused to give him
absolution until he promised that he would no longer make his master
violate Lent. Faithful to his promise, the cook changed his sauces,
whereupon the Cardinal complained bitterly that his dinners were not so
good as formerly, and the cook was called up, and obliged to tell his
story. The Cardinal inquired the name of his confessor, and having sent
for him, remonstrated with him for meddling with the private government
of his family. The friar replied, that the cook’s salvation was in
danger if he had continued to give his master _gras_ instead of
_maigre_. “Well,” exclaimed the Cardinal, “and do you think it
reasonable that, to save the soul of such a low fellow as that, you
should expose my Eminence to the discomfort of fasting!”[117]

                  *       *       *       *       *

During the time the affair of the Jesuits was in agitation, whenever
Cardinal Marefoschi went to visit Cardinal de Bernis, a valet-de-chambre
in the house of the latter, and who was also a spy, used to hang a white
handkerchief out at the top of a chimney, to mark the commencement and
termination of the visit, as a signal to the Jesuits at the Roman
College, who looked out from the top of their church for it.

                  *       *       *       *       *

On Wednesday morning, February 27th (1782), the Pope set out for Vienna
at half-past nine in the morning. The Grand-Duke and Duchess of Russia,
who have been every day to St. Peter’s to see him, were there between
six and seven waiting to take leave of his Holiness. They had some
conversation with him, and the Grand-Duke attended him to his carriage.
Monsignore Marcucci, Vicegerent and Patriarch of Constantinople, and
Monsignore Contesini, Archbishop of Athens, both men of very low
extraction, accompanied him, besides some inferior persons of his
household. The streets were lined with people, far beyond Ponte Molle.
Many Roman gentlemen rode on horseback before him for several miles. The
Pope threw himself almost out of the carriage in order to bestow his
benedictions upon the people, who kept crying aloud: “Santo Padre, la
benedizione prima di partire;” and others, “Buon viaggio.” It is said
that the Minister of Portugal, when he went with his lady and child to
take leave of the Pope, left upon the table a schedule for sixty
thousand crowns, by the Queen’s command. The Venetians are to send
twelve senators, among whom, it is supposed, will be the Doge, with four
hundred men, to meet him on the frontiers and accompany him through
their States. The King of Sardinia intends to wait upon his Holiness in
person. The Pope’s nephew, Don Lewis, attended him to the coach, and
held his hand for half a minute after he was in. He was in the most
violent distress, and shed tears for three or four hours. His wife was
at the Villa Papa Giulia to take leave of his Holiness, and was likewise
much affected. The Pope told her to take care of herself and go to her
husband.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Count and Countess of the North (Grand-Duke and Duchess of Russia),
when they were at Naples, refused the Palace Giustiniani which the King
had fitted up for their reception, but they dined at Court, and went to
the balls and theatre. The King got up a hunt for them, to which they
promised to go, but afterwards sent word to decline it. The King,
however, went, and did not return to Caserta till the day before their
departure. On their journey to Pæstum, the King had engaged them to stop
at one of his country-houses, to which he himself went the day before so
as to be ready to receive them. After he was gone, they sent him word
that they could not stop there. The Queen called for them in her
carriage to take them to a balcony to see a horse-race, that had been
got up on purpose for them, and to which they had agreed to go—and,
after all, they would not. Whenever her Majesty called for them, she had
to wait half an hour at their door. When they went away, the people
hissed them. They were very affable, however, and good natured with
artists. They called on Mr. Jenkins, to choose statues for the Empress,
went all over his house, and stayed near two hours. The Duchess bought a
beautiful Faun, a Faustina, in the shape of Venus, and a Genius. They
were also at the studio of Mr. Hewetson, where they saw a fine monument
which he is going to send to Ireland. They were much pleased with a
small statue of Cleopatra in marble, which they purchased, and the
Duchess sat to him for her bust.

As they passed through Milan, the Archduke and Duchess made a “Festino”
for them. As there was not nobility enough in the town, and as the lower
sort of people had never been admitted to their entertainments, they
made experiment of a “Festino,” and let the latter come, and they
behaved themselves very becomingly. Amongst other masks were two nuns
and two friars, who walked about and conducted themselves quietly and
well. After they had stayed about two hours, to the great surprise of
the company, an officer was sent to them to say, that if they had
remained long enough for their own pleasure, their departure would be
agreeable to the company. They immediately went down stairs, followed by
an infinite number of the curious, who saw them enter a carriage, the
coachman and servants of which were masked, and who were ordered to
drive to the Capucin convent, outside such a gate. They drove off in a
violent hurry, and in a moment were out of sight, leaving the spectators
in as much astonishment as uncertainty. It is generally supposed that it
was a plan concerted to test the feelings of the people with regard to
the Emperor’s projected abolition of convents.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Prince of Solms was exceedingly pleased with a young lady who was in
the year of her novitiate and about to become a nun. He fancied that his
attentions were beginning to shake her resolution, and though the day of
profession was near at hand, he fancied that she would prefer him to a
cloister. One day, after he had paid her a long visit at the grate, and
had no great reason to complain of her cruelty, she begged of him, as a
particular favour, a lock of his hair. The Prince, confirmed in his
flattering illusions by this request, immediately cut one off for her.
At his next visit he found her particularly lively and agreeable. “May I
presume,” he said, “to hope that you have given up all idea of a convent
life, and have cast a favourable look upon myself?” “So great is my
affection for you,” replied the lady, “that I have just finished making
a wig for the Infant Jesus out of your hair, and if you come to my
profession to-morrow you will see it on the altar.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                [1783.]


One day in April, 1783, a Frenchman, who had subsisted on charity, died
in his thirty-third year, and was carried to the Madonna de’ Monte to be
buried. His corpse was exposed there for several days before interment,
and many miracles are told and believed as having been performed by him
both before and after his death. His limbs were flexible, and he
appeared asleep. Some say they smelt a perfume; others, a stink; others,
again, nothing whatever. As they were lowering the body into the grave
it nearly fell, when it put out one hand and supported itself on the
bier, and this more than once—as the story runs. A dumb person recovered
his speech, a lame person the use of his limbs, &c. The Abbé Marotti
says that he has dined with a gentleman who was cured of a toothache by
the touch of a rosary that had been near the body; that the young Duke
de Rignano was so frightened at hearing the dumb man speak, that he ran
out of the church; and much more nonsense to the same effect. It is
certain that the church has since been constantly crowded with people,
and amongst them some persons of distinction, in whose presence a vein
was opened, but no blood appeared. The man used to spend his whole time
in praying, and was so dirty that millions of vermin crawled about him,
none of which he would suffer to be killed, saying they had as much
right to live as himself. There was found upon him a certificate from La
Trappe, saying that he had been there, but that the discipline was so
severe he had been obliged to quit it—adding, that his sanctity was so
exemplary he would edify any place he went to. The stories told of him,
such as his predicting the hour of his death, the cure of the butcher’s
wife in whose house he died, &c., are too tedious and ridiculous to
repeat.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Prince Altieri, who is blind, has been twice to the Madonna de’ Monti,
in the hope that the supposed saint would restore his sight, but without
effect. He has promised, that if this miracle be wrought in his favour,
he will immediately erect a chapel to the saint.

Abbé Marotti says he is perfectly well acquainted with the priest who
was his confessor at the Roman College, and who quotes two instances in
which the “servo di Dio,” as they call the dead man, divined his
thoughts. The Contestabile Colonna’s mother was carried the other day to
the Madonna de’ Monti, in the hope that the saint would cure her
madness. The church is now shut up—some say on account of the robberies,
&c., committed there; others, because they are setting up a tombstone to
the saint. The Princess Santa Croce assured us that she had never
experienced greater consolation than in contemplating his dead body, and
declared that it was many years since any such miracles have been
performed. A Bostonian has abjured Protestantism at the Santo Uffizio,
being convinced, according to his own report, by these miracles. His
instructor was an ex-Jesuit, and it is probable that the true motive for
his conversion was want of money, as he appears very shabbily dressed.
The Duchess of Gallicano has given her infant the name of Benedetto, in
honour of the new saint, whose name was Benoît Labré.

                  *       *       *       *       *

One of the best informed, and one of the most delightful persons in
every respect whom I ever knew, was the Père Jacquier, a Minime of the
French convent, the “Trinité du Mont.” His name was well known in
England, as he and his friend, Père le Sueur, were the best commentators
on Newton. His colleague had been dead a few years, and Père Jacquier
was himself rather advanced in life, but his faculties were perfect, and
he was as active in person as in mind. He was a native of Champagne, and
became a monk when very young, there being no regulations at that time
to prevent such early professions. He used to say that it was not by the
desire of his parents, but that it was all arranged by an elder sister.
His genius was both sound and versatile, and his acquirements very
extensive. His proficiency in every branch of mathematics scarcely
exceeded his taste for polite literature, the classical purity of his
Greek and Latin compositions, and the correctness of his critical
observations. He was also an excellent historian, and well versed in
many modern languages. He was fond of society, and his manners were not
only polished in the highest degree, but the beneficence of his
disposition, and the sensibility of his heart, rendered them so
peculiarly attractive, that he gained a new friend whenever he made a
new acquaintance. His feelings were extremely acute, and the affection
of those whom he loved and esteemed was the only treasure he was
solicitous to keep. Never was there a more charitable man. He gave away
all he had, and was, besides, ever ready to assist with his advice and
influence all who applied to him.

In his youth he had been engaged in busy scenes with Cardinal Alberoni,
and had lived with Voltaire, and Madame du Châtelet, and, indeed, with
all the wits and philosophers then in fashion. He was also employed in
the education of the Prince, afterwards Duke, of Parma. The friendship
that existed between him and Père le Sueur was extraordinary. They
agreed perfectly, because they had the same general views and the same
goodness of principle, with diametrically opposite dispositions. Le
Sueur had all the judgment, patience, and exactness necessary for the
great work they had in hand, and Jacquier all the genius, fire, and
penetration. In this social intercourse this opposition of qualities
kept them from interfering with each other’s way of life, and the loss
of such a friend as Le Sueur was never repaired to the survivor. I did
not know Père Jacquier till some years after this trying event, which, I
believe, threw him more than ever into general society. As I have
already remarked, he was then an old man, but his imagination was as
vivid, and his heart as warm, as ever.

Strangers, politicians, men of letters, men of fashion, were all alike
desirous to become acquainted with Père Jacquier. There was no pedantry,
no vanity, in his mode of conversing, but if he thought himself
neglected he was very unhappy; not offended, but like a child whom its
parents have left at home. On this account Cardinal de Bernis used to
say of him: “Le Père Jacquier a l’esprit d’un homme, et le cœur d’un
enfant.” We used to see him almost every day, and he was so good as to
take much pains with me in my studies. It so happened that an English
naval officer came to Rome with a friend for a few weeks, and my mother
was anxious that they should see everything most worthy of notice. This
often engaged us so that we were not always at home at the hours Père
Jacquier used to call. My mother found out that he was much vexed, and
ordered me to write a note to him, to say that we had two friends who
were very desirous to make his acquaintance, and would perhaps have some
favour to ask of him. This set all right immediately: he became very
intimate with them, and paid them every possible attention. He was a
thoroughly good Christian, but by no means a bigot, and his intimacy
with the philosophers made some people suspect his religious principles.
But, for my part, I never heard a word from him which could be thought
reprehensible by the severest moralist or most scrupulous Christian; and
when some secret enemy wrote to the Bishop of his diocese, to complain
of his frequenting the society of Voltaire and Madame du Châtelet, that
prelate answered, “he wished those personages were always in such good
company.” In fact, Père Jacquier had seen enough of the philosophers to
be able to estimate them at their just value. His heart was too warm to
sympathise with their cold selfishness and hypocritical philanthropy,
and his mind too enlightened to adopt the errors of their systematic
infidelity. He would say it is impossible to investigate the earth and
the skies without adoring the Creator, or to feel the weakness of our
nature without being a Christian.

Pope Ganganelli would have secularised Père Jacquier, but he declined
it. He admitted that, if he had to begin life again, he would not be a
monk, but it was now too late to make a change without necessity. He was
very well satisfied, he said, with his present situation, which did not
deprive him of the pleasure of seeing his friends: any alteration,
therefore, would only make people talk to no purpose. Besides his
pension as professor at Rome, he had one from the Duke of Parma, but he
gave everything away, and very often had no money left before the end of
the quarter. I think it was in the beginning of February, and the
weather rather colder than usual, that he came in one morning and
complained of not being well. My mother remarked his dress, and said:
“Why, you have got on your summer clothing already, and must have caught
cold.” He went home, and was laid up for some days, and we afterwards
learned that a poor person having asked him for money when he had none
to give, he had put on his summer dress and bestowed his winter one upon
the mendicant.

Another day he came to us with a very pretty little watch in his hand,
which he had won in a lottery. He was delighted with his prize, and
begged me to accept of it, but my mother said: “Père Jacquier, I will
tell you what to do with the watch. Take it to the man of whom you hire
a carriage when you want one. I know you are exact in payment” (for that
he was). “Let it be valued, and you will then have the pleasure of
visiting your friends, whether it rain, or shine, for a long while.” He
smiled and did as she advised, for he never liked to hire a carriage
unless he could pay for it at once.

His conversation was full of anecdotes, which he related in the most
clear and succinct manner. He was in correspondence with sensible and
learned men of all countries, for he had no prejudices, but great
discernment of character, and, though he liked to know every one who had
a name in the world, he soon made the proper distinctions. One day, as
we were looking at different portraits in a villa, the Chevalier de P.,
who was with us, observed one of Père Jacquier, and wrote under it the
following lines, which are truly characteristic:

                      Sage et profond calculateur!
                        Heureux disciple d’Uranie!
                      Ses amis parlent de son cœur,
                        Et l’univers de son génie.

There was a lady then at Rome who passed for being remarkably sensible
and well informed; but one of her most intimate associates was a young
man, who was thought the reverse of all that. I was told that Père
Jacquier said to her: “Take care of what you are doing. I believe your
conduct to be very correct; but when a man or a woman of great abilities
is constantly seen with one of the other sex who has not those
advantages, the world is ill natured enough to suppose that the intimacy
is not of the mind.”[118]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Emperor Joseph II. was at that time (1783) making many “reforms,” or
“innovations,” as they were respectively designated by those who
approved or disapproved of them. The Pope thought it expedient to take a
journey to Vienna and converse with him on the subject, with a view, if
possible, to stop his going too far. The Romans, who have a great talent
for satire, criticised this project, and, like other nations, talked not
too loyally of his proceedings. They particularly noticed the number of
prelates he took with him. He has left us, they said, no one but
Monsignore Resta and Monsignore Testa, the only two Cardinals who
remained at Rome. It was also suggested that, as the Grand-Duke of
Russia called himself “le Comte du Nord,” the Pope ought to leave his
card as “l’Abbé du Midi.” The Pope, however, was received most
courteously and respectfully by the Emperor, his family, and his
subjects. He did not stay long, and when he came back he said that he
was perfectly satisfied; that Joseph II. might have some odd ideas; but
that, on the whole, he was a sensible, well-meaning man, a good
Christian, and one who wished to promote the happiness of his people.

That Pius VI. was a great sovereign cannot be doubted. His draining the
Pontine Marshes, his works at Terracina, which his unfortunate fate left
unfinished, all he did for the arts, showed what he was. But these great
undertakings could not be carried on without expense, and he was often
straitened for money. And when these works were commenced how could he
foresee the fatal storm that was rising? Had he not reason to believe
that what he was doing would eventually enrich his country? His noble
demeanour in adversity must have silenced those who were always finding
fault with him in his prosperity, as it furnished an incontrovertible
proof of the greatness of his mind.

Joseph II. returned his visit, and found at Rome Gustavus III., King of
Sweden. A greater contrast could not be imagined than the appearance of
those two monarchs. The Emperor, in a plain uniform, attended by an
aide-de-camp in an equally simple military dress, and the King of
Sweden, with his numerous suite of courtiers in velvets, satins, and
embroidery, went to all the great parties; but no fêtes were given to
them, at the Emperor’s particular request.

There was something in the manner of Gustavus III. very disadvantageous
to him. He chatted much, but always began by a silly sort of laugh,
which made one doubt his having the understanding or information which
he really possessed. The gentlemen who were with him wore white
handkerchiefs tied round one arm, in remembrance of what had been the
signal for his partisans in the change of constitution by which he had
so greatly offended many of the nobles of his country. It was supposed
that these innovations had been suggested to him by M. de Vergennes, and
by others, during his stay at Paris. He was apparently very partial to
France, and he not only spoke, but wrote, the language perfectly, for I
have read some very pretty French comedies composed by him in very good
taste; and also a drama, entitled “Gustavus Vasa,” in Swedish, which he
was supposed to have written. In this was introduced a scene in
imitation of that where Richard III. sees the ghosts of the persons
whose death he had caused. Here it is Christian, King of Denmark, who is
said to have committed such cruelties in Sweden, and who was conquered
by Gustavus Vasa and the brave Dalecarlians. One of the songs, for it is
an opera, may be thus translated:

                  Noble shades! great sires arise!
                    Sweden’s heroes! knights of yore!
                  If her welfare still ye prize,
                    Give to Freedom life once more.
                  Say, shall tyrants—say, shall slaves,
                  Trample o’er your sacred graves?
                  No! your ghosts to war’s alarms
                    Let e’en thraldom’s name excite!
                  Stretch, vindictive, forth your arms
                    From the breast of endless Night!

Count de Fersen, who was so well known afterwards for his attempts to
save the unfortunate Marie Antoinette,[119] and Count de Staël, who
married Mademoiselle Necker, were of the King’s suite. It is well known
that Gustavus was warmly hostile to the French revolution, which he was
preparing to oppose in the most active manner when he was assassinated.

Travellers of all nations were to be met at Rome, and, what is usually
called the best society not being very extensive, it was more easy to
form acquaintances, and even intimacies, than in most other great
cities. We knew almost all the English, and many of the foreigners.
Amongst the latter was a Knight of Malta, the Commander de Dolomieu. He
was a man of good family, from Dauphiny, and very agreeable in society.
He had studied mineralogy and chemistry with great success, and had
written a highly esteemed work on the great earthquake in Calabria.

[At a subsequent period, after the restoration of the King of the Two
Sicilies to Naples, in 1799, Miss Knight was in a position to render the
Commander de Dolomieu a very important service. The following mention is
made of him in a memorandum which appears to have formed part of a
narrative of events subsequent to Bonaparte’s Egyptian campaign: “I
received one day a letter from Messina, signed by a merchant, I believe
an English Quaker, enclosing one from the Commander de Dolomieu, who had
long been our intimate friend, and with whose family we were much
acquainted. He had, with other men of science, accompanied Napoleon
Bonaparte into Egypt, but on his return had been obliged by bad weather
to put into Messina, where he was thrown into a dungeon. He described
his condition as most miserable, and no doubt it was so in every
respect.[120]

“The Commander de D. was a man of ability and warm feeling. He was the
second son of a noble family in France, and, according to the custom of
those times, belonged to the Order of Malta. His elder brother offended
his father by his imprudence and impropriety of conduct. When the
Marquis was in a state of health so precarious that little hope was
entertained of his life, these two sons were sent for by their mother.
The eldest was at Paris, but put off his journey from day to day. The
second was with the Maltese galleys at Lisbon, but obtained leave of
absence, and instantly hastened to the family château, near Lyons. On
his arrival his father told him that he meant to make him his heir, and
only leave to his elder brother an annual income, enough for his
maintenance but not for the support of his extravagance. The Chevalier
de D. did all he could to persuade his father not to disinherit his
elder brother; but finding his efforts were fruitless, he went off to
Lyons, and there, in a Chapter of his Order, pronounced the irrevocable
vows which put it out of his power to receive the inheritance. After
this noble, but what many will think romantic, act of liberality, he
went back to Malta, where for some time he held one of the highest
employments, and enjoyed the confidence of the Grand-Master. He had
reason to believe that about that time the Empress Catherine was
endeavouring to make a secret treaty with the Neapolitan Government, for
the purpose of becoming Patroness, or perhaps Mistress, of the island of
Malta. When that island was given by the Emperor Charles V. to the
Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, after the loss of Rhodes, he
stipulated that he was to receive from them, as their liege lord, a
falcon every year. That devolved to his descendants, the Kings of
Naples, and the Commander de D. was persuaded that it would be
transferred to the Empress of Russia if the plot succeeded. That it did
not was attributed to his influence with the Grand-Master, and,
consequently, he was not in good odour at Naples. He had also enemies
among his brother knights, and as he was instrumental in the surrender
of Malta to Bonaparte, though he is said to have acted from a good
motive, this enmity was not a little increased. His chemical and
mineralogical studies naturally threw him into the society of the
philosophers, and at the beginning of the Revolution he belonged to the
Constitutional party, but he was nevertheless one of those who joined
the Swiss Guards in defence of Louis XV. at the Tuileries.”]

I ought before this to have mentioned the celebrated dramatist, Count
Alfieri. One of his tragedies, the “Antigone,” had been represented on a
stage erected at the Spanish Ambassador’s, where several plays were
performed during the month of October, and where, notwithstanding its
being the season of “villeggiatura,” there was much good company. The
Prince and Princess Rospigliosi, her brother the Duke di Ceri, his young
Duchess, and his secretary, were the principal actors; but in the
“Antigone” Alfieri himself acted _Creon_; the Duke di Giro, _Hemon_; the
Duchess, _Creusa_; and Princess Rospigliosi, _Antigone_. They all played
their parts with skill and propriety. The Duchess di Ciro had been
taught by Princess Giustiniani, her mother, who had been very partial to
this amusement, in which she also excelled.

In the “Barber of Seville,” Prince Rospigliosi, who in society appeared
to be rather a grave man, was a truly comic _Figaro_. The Countess of
Albany was then at Rome, and lived at the Chancery, in the apartments of
her brother-in-law, the Cardinal of York. This lady, as is well known,
was a Princess of Stolberg, and great-grand-daughter by the mother’s
side of Thomas Earl of Aylesbury,[121] who died at Brussels. She had
been married to the Pretender eight or ten years, and lived with him at
Florence, till one day she took refuge in a convent, on account, she
said, of the ill-treatment she received from him when he was
intoxicated. She afterwards came to Rome, where, as I have said, she was
lodged at the Chancery. She had a lady residing with her, a Chanoinesse.
The Countess was present at the performance of the “Antigone,” but she
did not in general go out to parties. Morning visits, however, she paid,
in which and in her walks she was always attended by the Countess de M.
But the romantic attachment of Count Alfieri, of which no mystery was
made—indeed, the verses he composed and the whole of his conduct
sufficiently declared it—induced Cardinal York, on his return from a
visit to his brother, who had been very ill at Florence, to apply to the
Pope for the dismissal of the Count from Rome. Pius made answer that,
according to the laws and customs of the State, he had no right to
dismiss a stranger who was committing no offence against the country;
and that all he could do would be to write to the Countess of Albany,
and request her to persuade her friend, for the sake of her own
character, to leave Rome. He did so, and the Countess answered, that
Count Alfieri never came to visit her but at the hour when her doors
were open to all her acquaintance; she would beg of him, however, to
comply with the request suggested by his Holiness. Count Alfieri
remained a few days longer, and then went off at noon in a handsome
equipage to visit Paris, London, &c. There was something very
extraordinary, but very fine, in the character of Alfieri. He was
introduced to us, and he asked my mother for letters to England, which
she was happy to give him.

I think I never knew two persons more unlike than Alfieri and the
Countess of Albany, in appearance, in manner, and even in sentiments.
She must, no doubt, have been very pretty in early youth. She had fine
eyes and teeth, but her figure was not graceful. There was nothing of
the ideal beauty about her which one would have imagined as the object
of Alfieri’s dreams of bliss; but she must have been very much admired,
for all travellers, as I have been told, used to call her the Queen of
Hearts. Married at twenty to a man of fifty, and in a political, or
rather, I should say, historical situation so peculiar, she was perhaps
more noticed than she otherwise would have been. To us she was very kind
and attentive, invited us to visit her, and never in any way neglected
us. She wrote plain, sensible letters, and was not devoid of
intelligence. Although I never heard her saying anything which could
offend religious or moral principles, I have been told that she was very
sceptical with respect to the former.


                              NAPLES—1785.


The Bishop of Castellamare, who was more than eighty years of age, still
mounted his horse. He was very good-natured and cheerful, and enjoyed
excellent health, which he attributed to his practice of fumigating his
apartments with perfumed gums. He had been for many hours buried under
the ruins of the house he inhabited in Calabria, at the time of the
great earthquake. The solidity of a beam saved him from being crushed
when the roof fell in. He is the only person whom I can recollect of our
Roman or Neapolitan acquaintance who ever endeavoured to bring me over
to the Roman Catholic religion. I begged him not to talk to me on the
subject; but he persisted in doing so. At last I said, with the
impertinent familiarity which his good nature encouraged: “Well, you
shall say what you please if for every half hour of this advice you will
send me a basket of curious specimens of lava and minerals for a friend
of mine, who is making a fine collection.” The good Bishop took the
hint, sent me several baskets of curious specimens of minerals, and
never uttered another word on the subject of conversion. I am sorry to
add, that soon after we left Naples, being made “Cappellano Maggiore,”
or high almoner to the King, who had a great regard for him, he was
obliged to give up his usual mode of life, and did not long survive his
honours.

Mr. and Mrs. Piozzi passed the winter at Naples and gave little
concerts. He played with great taste on the pianoforte, and used to
carry about a miniature one in his carriage. Mrs. Piozzi read to my
mother part of a manuscript, which she afterwards published, respecting
Dr. Johnson; but as she was angry with him on account of his disapproval
of her second marriage, she occasionally mentioned him in a manner that
displeased my mother, who always preserved a high veneration for his
memory.

Brilliant and gay as Naples then was, I did not like it so well as Rome,
nor indeed so well as I liked it at two subsequent visits. However, we
had no reason to complain of the time we passed in this capital, the
Parthenope of old, and still in a great measure retaining its ancient
character. Balls were given at what was called the “Accademia de’
Nobili,” something in the style of Almack’s. There was also another
“Accademia” for persons of the second class, as there was a considerable
number of opulent merchants from different countries visiting Naples.
The King and Queen made their appearance at each at least once a year,
and the foreign Ministers also went to both from time to time.

Sir William Hamilton had a very fine collection of Etruscan vases and
some good pictures. From his house, and more particularly from a boudoir
on the upper floor, he used to enjoy a magnificent view of the bay,
reflected on the mirrors which covered the entire side of the room
opposite to the semicircular window. The bay, by moonlight, appeared to
great advantage, and sometimes the full moon seemed to emerge from the
crater of Mount Vesuvius. On other nights it was curious to see the
lighted boats employed in the tunny fishery. The various kinds of
shell-fish which are found here are not to be told. The sailors of the
country pretend that everything which exists on land has its fellow in
the sea. Sea-oranges and sea-lemons I have seen and sketched; and one
day, as we were in a boat, we saw a little nautilus sailing and rowing
beside us.

The King of Naples had gone to Leghorn, I forget on what occasion, but
his little squadron sailed in not long after our arrival, in very good
style. He was accompanied by an English frigate, commanded by Captain
Blankett, an old friend of my mother, with whom she had constantly
corresponded since our departure from England, and whose letters were
very entertaining. Through him we were first made known to General
Acton, who was then, and for many years afterwards, everything at
Naples. He was Commander-in-Chief by land and sea, Minister,
confidential friend of the King and Queen, and in his politics much
attached to Austria and England. He was of a very ancient English Roman
Catholic family, but, I think, was born in France or Flanders. His elder
brother was in the Austrian service. He himself had been a midshipman in
our navy, but as in those days young men of his religion could not hold
commissions, he went into the Tuscan service, in which he obtained the
command of a frigate. When the Court of Naples wanted to put its navy on
a better footing, he was summoned thither for that purpose.

We were introduced to the Queen by her “Cameriera Maggiore,” from whose
apartment we walked through many passages of the palace, preceded by one
of her footmen, carrying a lantern, for it was evening. We found her
Majesty standing by a marble table between two windows. She asked us a
few indifferent questions, and then dismissed us to receive others. From
that time we were invited to everything that was going forward, but the
amusements were chiefly hunting-parties; no offence, however, was taken
at sending excuses.


                              NAPLES—1798.


September 3.—The joy expressed by the Neapolitans [at the victory of the
Nile] is very great. The King, when he heard it, was at table; he rose
and kissed the Queen and children, and said, “Now, children, you are
safe.” It happened to be a gala for the birth of a Princess of Tuscany:
the Queen told all the ladies, &c., that Sicily was safe.

22nd.—In the evening, went out with Sir William and Lady Hamilton,
music, &c., to meet Admiral Nelson, who in the _Vanguard_, with the
_Thalia_ frigate (Captain Newhouse), was seen coming in. We went on
board, about a league out at sea, and sailed in with him: soon after us,
the King came on board, and stayed till the anchor was dropped. He
embraced the Admiral with the greatest warmth, and said he wished he
could have been in the engagement, and served under his orders; and that
he likewise wished he could have been in England when the news of the
victory arrived there. He went down to see the ship, and was delighted
to perceive the care taken of a wounded man, who had two to serve him,
and one reading to him. He asked to see the hat which saved the
Admiral’s life, when he was wounded in the head with a splinter. The
Queen was taken with a fit of the ague when she was coming on board with
the Princesses. Commodore Caraccioli came soon after the King, and many
of the Neapolitan nobility, bands of music, &c. It happened to be the
anniversary of our King’s coronation. The Admiral came on shore with us,
and said, it was the first time he had been out of his ship for six
months, except once on board the _Lord St. Vincent_. The Russian
Ambassador and all the Legation came out to meet him. When we landed at
the Health Office, the applauses and the crowd of people were beyond
description. Admiral Nelson is little, and not remarkable in his person
either way; but he has great animation of countenance, and activity in
his appearance: his manners are unaffectedly simple and modest. He
lodges at Sir William Hamilton’s, who has given him the upper apartment.
The whole city is mad with joy.... In the evening, went to visit the
Admiral, at Sir William Hamilton’s, where there was a grand
illumination. The Neapolitans have written up “Vittoria” and “Viva
Nelson” at every corner of the streets.

November 5.—Appeared in sight Admiral Nelson, in the _Vanguard_, with
the _Minotaur_, Captain Louis, from Malta, and they were all day coming
in; but the Admiral came on shore at four o’clock, and went immediately
to Caserta, where he was scarce arrived when the Hereditary Princess was
brought to bed of a daughter, and the bells were ringing, guns firing,
&c. Next morning, the 6th, the Admiral presented to the King the French
colours taken at Gozo, telling his Majesty that he had sixteen thousand
subjects more than before.

December 15.—The night before last came in two Portuguese ships, and the
_Alcmene_ (Captain Hope), with a Turkish Ambassador, interpreters, &c.,
bringing the diamond aigrette, &c., for Lord Nelson. This Court is in
the greatest consternation, and does not trust any of its subjects. We
were desired by Lord Nelson and the Hamiltons to pack up our things,
previous to an embarkation, which seems inevitable. The Queen and
Princesses are to go with Lord Nelson.


                             WINDSOR—1805.


[In the Autobiographical Memoir, it is stated that Miss Knight became a
resident at Windsor in December of this year. From the following
extracts from her Journal, however, it would appear that her residence
commenced in June.]

                  *       *       *       *       *

June 22.—In the afternoon went to Windsor. Stopped on the way at
Hounslow for want of horses, on account of the Ascot Races. The road
from Staines to Windsor very pretty, with neat country houses. On my
arrival at a house in Park-street, near the entrance of Windsor, which
belongs to the Queen, I found very comfortable apartments neatly fitted
up, and a present of two pieces of India muslin, two of English, and one
of Chambery, from her Majesty.

Sunday, 23rd.—In the evening went to Lady Aylesbury’s apartments at the
Castle, and with her, at half-past eight, to the Queen’s drawing-room.
The King, Queen, and Princesses there. Music in the ante-room. Came away
at a little before eleven, when the Royal Family went to supper.

26th.—In consequence of the Queen’s invitation, went at half-past six in
the evening to Frogmore, with Miss Goldsworthy. The volunteers had dined
there. Besides their Majesties, the Royal Family, and their suite, some
of the neighbouring gentlemen and ladies were invited, and Dr. Goodall
with his Etonians. In a barn fitted up with festoons of evergreens and
flowers, two German “petites pièces” were extremely well acted by a
company of little children. After which, an automaton danced on the
rope, and a species of phantasmagoria was represented, consisting of
dancing figures, which formed groups and separated in an ingenious
manner. All finished before ten.

December 22.—Great joy about the Emperor of Russia’s conduct.[122] His
birthday to-morrow. Princess Elizabeth ate something to resemble a
tallow-candle, made of apple and burnt almond.


                             WINDSOR—1808.


June 4.—The King’s birthday. Went to Lady Charlotte Finch’s. The Queen,
and the Princesses, the Prince of Wales, and almost all the Royal Dukes,
came there, as also little Princess Charlotte, who is very graceful and
amiable. The Duchess of Brunswick had been to visit the King, and came
afterwards (before the company arrived) to see the apartments. She was
dressed wholly in white crape, and looked well, but much older than the
King. Her voice is loud.

9th.—In the morning went with the Queen and Princess Elizabeth to
Frogmore. Two Spanish noblemen[123] arrived in town to ask assistance
against the French. Catalonia and the Asturias in arms. The King much
pleased, but would not leave the novels that were being read to him.

August 10.—Went at half-past ten in the morning with Princess Elizabeth
to her cottage at Old Windsor, and helped to arrange things there till
between one and two, when we dressed for the company, who were beginning
to arrive. The Queen and the Princesses, with the Princess Sophia of
Gloucester, came about half-past two. The day was fine, and the grounds
looked very pretty. The Queen and Royal Family dined in the house: the
rest of the company in two tents, in one of which Lady Isabella Thynne
presided, and in the other, Lady George Murray. The hands of the Oxford
Blues and the Staffordshire Militia played. After dinner, when the
children came, there were three booths, at which they and all the
company had fairings; and then the children danced upon the lawn. It was
altogether a very pretty fête, and the Queen seemed much pleased, as,
indeed, did everybody. She went away at seven, or a little before, as
the King was expected to return from Town about that time. The rest of
the company stayed nearly an hour longer. In the evening I went to the
Queen’s party at the Castle.

October 7.—At Rochetts, Admiral Russell came. He asked for a fortnight’s
leave, but was dismissed _civilly_ from his command with great praises.
He said that, at all events, they would have teased him out of it. He
hoisted the Royal standard for the Queen of France, but it was not
approved.[124] He asked Lord St. Vincent whether he had done right, who
answered: “You could not do too much for a woman.” He is an honest,
brave officer, and goes by the name of Paddy Russell. He came in full
uniform. Lord and Lady St. Vincent are very good to the poor. They have
made gates instead of stiles through all the grounds for the convenience
of the people who come to church.


                                [1809.]


June 24.—Went to the Queen’s party to hear Mrs. Bates sing. She was a
Miss Harrop, a poor girl with a very fine voice, and was patronised by
the Dudley Ward family. She married, when young, a Mr. Bates,
commissioner of the Victualling Department, whose widow she now is. She
was considered the finest singer of Handel’s music ever known; and even
now, though turned of fifty, she preserves her voice most finely.
Bartleman sang some duets with her exceedingly well, and Wesley played.

25th.—In the evening at the Queen’s party. Wesley, who is a Methodist,
but plays on the organ finely, cannot, of course, be admitted into the
choir. He presented a petition to the King this morning, who gave him
100_l._

September 23.—The King was not at chapel this morning. Mr. Perceval,
Lord Liverpool, and the Duke of York were with him, probably settling
the new Administration. He heard, but not from Ministers, of the duel
between Lord Castlereagh and Mr. Canning on the evening of the day it
happened (the 22nd), but was not affected, though he thought it very
silly and wrong.

October 25.—Accession-day. The morning was ushered in by the discharge
of cannon, ringing of bells, &c. Went early to chapel, the company
chiefly in Garter blue. Afterwards to Mrs. Duval’s, to see the “feu de
joie,” and the troops march past—horse artillery, Blues, Stafford,
Windsor, and Clewer volunteers. An ox was roasted whole, and two sheep,
in a place called Bachelor’s Acre. The Queen, the Princesses, and the
Royal Dukes went to see it, and tasted the beef and pudding. In the
evening I went to the Castle, where there was the usual party: we were
all dressed in white satin. At nine, I accompanied Princess Elizabeth,
Princess Charlotte of Wales, and Lady Caroline Damer to Frogmore. The
Queen, the Prince of Wales, and most of the Royal Dukes came a little
after ten, when the fireworks, &c., took place. Things were not well
managed in the gardens, but the supper and all the arrangements in the
house were very pleasant. The Queen was much overcome by the feelings of
the day, and the accounts from Princess Amelia have not been good for
some time past. The King appeared in good spirits. The town was very
orderly, though full of people. There were two illuminated arches and
several transparencies.

26th.—Went to the barracks of the Staffordshire Militia to see the men
at dinner. Their wives and children were also entertained at tables in
the middle of the room—the men on each side. Tasted their pudding. Many
ladies and most of the officers were there. A bull was baited this
morning, and a ball this evening at the Town Hall. The company of the
town and the chief attendants at the Castle were in the upper rooms at
Frogmore last night with Madame Beckersdorff. Thirteen hundred tickets
were issued for the gardens. The Queen’s party was about ninety,
consisting, for the most part, of the ladies and gentlemen of the
neighbourhood who visit their Majesties at the Castle, or those who are
in the habit of spending a few days with them. The Archbishop of
Canterbury was at chapel in the morning. The Queen desired I would write
an inscription[125] for the illuminated building, and I gave the
following one: “Britannia, grateful to Providence, celebrates the
fiftieth year of a reign sacred to piety and virtue.”

November 7.—Princess Amelia returned from Weymouth about three, in the
Prince of Wales’s carriage, in which a cot had been slung by Sir H.
Neale. The Duke of Clarence, Princess Mary, and Lady George Murray with
her. The Duke of Cambridge rode in before them. She is in a sad state of
weakness and suffering.


                                [1810.]


October 30.—Bulletins given out of the King’s illness, which it is,
however, hoped will be more favourable than formerly, as he submits to
whatever is ordered. Mr. Perceval and the Chancellor came down, but
could not see him: they saw the Queen. He is attended by Sir H. Halford
and Dr. Baillie; and Messrs. Dundas and Battiscombe.

November 2.—Parliament met yesterday, and only adjourned for a
fortnight, as Ministers could not obtain a signature from the King. I
went to the Queen at eleven; about twelve, dear Princess Amelia expired,
after a confinement of a year and eight months, and the most dreadful
sufferings, of which her exemplary piety alone afforded any alleviation.
Mr. Charles Digby often read prayers by her side, and she received the
Sacrament three times within the last month. The Prince of Wales and all
his brothers have been here constantly for the last three weeks.

3rd.—Went to inquire after the King; the bulletin says he had a better
night, but no diminution of fever.

4th.—In the morning went to Princess Augusta—and also on the 7th. Passed
the week in calling on Lady Ilchester, Lady Ely, and at home. Sir Henry
and Lady Halford in the Lane. Received a letter from the
Vice-Chamberlain (Lord Dartmouth being dead) to invite me to the funeral
in the name of her Majesty. Princess Augusta had before told me that the
King had named me to be at it on account of dear Princess Amelia’s
regard for me.

On the Wednesday evening, November 7th, sat up with Lady George Murray
to watch the remains of dear Princess Amelia in the room adjoining. The
King continues very ill, and Francis Willis was sent for, in addition to
the physicians, three days since.

10th.—Sir H. Halford seems to think the King better. His lucid intervals
are more frequent and longer.

11th.—Sir H. Halford says the King was quite rational this morning, and
aware of the death of Princess Amelia. He shed tears, and mentioned a
letter he had sent to her, and asked for the answer.

Ministers have been very cruelly impatient, and their desire of getting
his signature for proroguing the House occasioned sad scenes with the
physicians, who boldly withstood them. They could not, however, prevent
their sending down Willis, which will be a great affliction to the King
when he knows it, which he now must. He had made the Queen and all the
family swear he should never see the Willises more.

13th.—At four, went by the Queen’s desire to dine at the Castle with the
ladies, as did Lady Halford. The Queen and Royal Family dined by
themselves. Between six and seven we went in three carriages to the
cloisters. Lady Chesterfield, chief mourner, with Ladies Ilchester and
Macclesfield, her supporters, and Lady Halford, trainbearer, in the
first. In the second, Ladies Ely, Cranley, Isabella Thynne, and George
Murray, supporters of the pall; in the third, Mrs. Egerton, Mrs.
Feilding, and myself. (Miss Townshend was not well enough to come.) Lady
Albinia Cumberland, as senior lady of the Princesses, went to Augusta
Lodge with Miss Goldsworthy and Mrs. Williams, and Mrs. Adams went in
the carriage with them, following the Prince and the Duke of Cambridge,
the executors, to attend the hearse to the church. We went to Dr.
Heath’s, where the equerries and grooms of the bedchamber were to wait
for being called. The Princes and chief mourners were in the
Garter-room. They were in black veils and gloves, we in long white crape
veils and gloves, the Blues and Staffords on duty; the Blues holding
torches every fifth man. Madame and Mademoiselle Beckersdorff, Miss
Planta, and Mademoiselle Montmellin also walked in the procession, and
the housekeepers and dressers; the soldiers were in ranks, through which
we passed. The service chanted. The church looked awfully fine, and the
choir where the first part of the service was performed still and
sublime. The Dean, who had just lost his brother (Lord Dartmouth, Lord
Chamberlain), performed the service. The anthem, chosen by the King, was
part of the 16th Psalm, from the ninth verse to the end. It used to be
sung by the Royal Family. The body was buried in a vault dug behind the
altar. The whole was very fine, and respectfully attended to by the
spectators. I felt an elevation of mind, which supported me, and a
sincere trust that the dear sufferer is now happy. We got home about
half-past ten. A great number of gentlemen and noblemen attached to the
Court, and all the Ministers, attended.

14th.—Was sent for by Princess Elizabeth to go to the Queen, who was
calm and tolerably well; afterwards went to Princess Elizabeth’s and to
Dr. Hallam’s. The King was asleep last night during the funeral; he
afterwards sent a kind message to the Queen and Princesses, and said he
was resigned, but has cried much, and continues so to do. This morning
he wished to settle everything for the payment of the people at Augusta
Lodge. Lady and Miss Halford, Mrs. and Miss Baillie, dined with me. Sir
Henry and Dr. B. drank tea—they are in almost constant attendance on the
King, and sit up in their turn.

16th.—Parliament met yesterday, and was prorogued for a fortnight
longer. The physicians were previously examined by Ministers. The King
was at that time better, but in the evening had much fever; this evening
he is again rather better.

22nd.—The King has been very ill for several days, and has scarcely any
sleep.

26th.—The King not so well last night; much the same this morning.

29th.—The physicians were examined at the Cockpit, by an open meeting of
Privy Councillors, yesterday and to-day.

30th.—Walked in the court. Sir Henry Halford. He, and Lady and Miss
Halford, dined with me. Yesterday the majority for an adjournment of a
fortnight was more than a hundred in the House of Commons; not so
considerable in that of the Lords. The Dukes of York and Cambridge voted
for Government; Clarence and Sussex against; Kent and Cumberland stayed
away.

December 6th.—In the morning the King not so well as he has been for the
last four or five days.

7th.—The King very ill, but rather better than yesterday.

8th.—The King continues very ill.

14th.—Went to the Queen, and to Princess Augusta. Both Houses of
Parliament met yesterday, and Ministers, having stated that the King was
not yet well enough for business, proposed a committee of twenty-one in
each House, for examining the physicians on the 14th and 15th; their
reports to be printed on Monday, the 17th, and the House to meet on the
19th for debate.

25th.—Christmas-day. A most dreadfully tempestuous night. The King was
very ill in the evening—a violent attack—and I believe in danger. The
Prince and Duke of Cumberland came in the night. All the Princes are
here. The King’s fever is greatly abated; but he was in serious danger
last night; his pulse was at 125.

26th.—In the morning went to Frogmore with the Queen, Princess
Elizabeth, and Lady Aylesbury; afterwards with the Queen at the Castle,
and with Lady A. The King much the same as before his late attack.

27th.—The Regency will be proposed in the House of Lords. The amendment
for an address lost by 26: 100 against 74. The Dukes of York and Sussex
spoke in favour of the amendment. Lord Grenville for the bill, but
against the conduct of Ministers, accusing them of high treason.


                                [1811.]


January 2nd.—Yesterday Ministers were left in a minority by 13, on the
question of the household, the amendment conferring part of the
patronage on the Prince of Wales, the rest on the Queen, with the care
of his Majesty’s person. Evening at Miss Goldsworthy’s and Lady
Aylesbury’s.

3rd.—Ministry yesterday left in a minority of 3, on the restrictions
they intended to impose on the Regent. Lord Porchester proposed the
amendment.

5th.—The Peers sat till five this morning. Opposition carried every
question except the right of granting peerages. Majorities of 3.

18th.—The King walked on the terrace yesterday with Willis and Heberden,
and was joined by Baillie. The fact is, Willis told him he might go, and
he was delighted; Heberden consented through weakness; and the key of a
tower staircase was procured before the page (Bolt) could refuse it. Sir
H. Halford was in Town, and Baillie did not know it, until, coming into
the apartment soon after, he missed his patient, and went down to him.
The Queen did not know it till the evening. The effect was hurtful, as
the irritation increased in consequence of the walks not being
continued, which, considering the cold and damp of the north terrace
(the only one not overlooked), and other inconveniences, it was
impossible to allow. It was probably a manœuvre of Willis to please
Ministers (and perhaps ordered by them), to make people suppose the King
better, and to get more votes on the Regency Bill question, which came
on that day; and they _had_ a majority of 27.

25th.—The Chancellor and Mr. Perceval could not see the King yesterday,
though the Chancellor had declared he would see him, as he would not put
the Great Seal to the Bill without it; but though the physicians all
declared he might, they would not either of them; probably not being
satisfied with what they heard of his Majesty’s state; they say they
will to-morrow; in the mean while a debate of importance will have taken
place. Lord Moira carried (by two) the adjournment against proxies on
Wednesday; his speech was uncommonly animated, and he very severely
reprehended the Ministers, said the Chancellor had come as a champion,
but in rusty armour, called them a nest of scorpions, and said the
nation was not so stultified by the oppressions of late years as not to
take notice of their proceedings.

26th.—The Chancellor and Mr. Perceval saw the King this morning, and the
Great Seal is to be put to the Regency Bill, as they can now have no
doubt of the unfortunate state of his mind.

30th.—Mr. Perceval saw the King this morning, and told him of the
Regency, which he bore very well; indeed, he continues in high
spirits—some delusions.

February 1.—The King saw Lord Liverpool and another of the Ministers
this morning, and they say he had no delusions—talked over the
Regency—very happy. The Prince sent a kind and dutiful message to the
King by Sir H. Halford, saying he should be happy to give up power to
him again, &c.

3rd.—The Prince does not change the administration; at least till he
sees whether the King recovers in a short time.

5th.—The Prince made known to the Ministers that he only kept them as
his father’s servants. It is said the King is really recovering.

9th.—The King saw the Queen yesterday and to-day, is much better, and
walks on the terrace.

11th.—The King told the Queen the first day he saw her, that never son
had made greater sacrifices to a father than the Prince had to him.

12th.—The Prince Regent saw the King this morning.

13th.—The Queen held her first Council to-day, and the physicians were
examined.

April 11th.—Saw the Queen and Princess Augusta. The King much the same.

17th.—The Queen’s Council, who come every Wednesday and Saturday, made a
good report of the King to-day.

20th.—This morning the King was thought to be much better; and in the
afternoon, while he was walking with the Dukes of York and Kent, they
thought him so far well, that it was found necessary to acquaint the
Queen’s Council, that no new arrangement might be made.

23rd.—Went with the Queen and the Princesses Elizabeth and Mary to
Frogmore, and went round the fields. The Duke of Sussex came at one.

27th.—The King walks on the terrace twice a day, but his mind is still
subject to many delusions, and it is a sad time for all the family.

20th.—The King rode out to-day for the first time since his illness.

30th.—The King was not out this morning, and none of his family have
seen him. The physicians were all here yesterday, and the Queen’s
Council.

July 13.—I went every evening this week (except this) to Frogmore with
the Queen and the Princesses Elizabeth and Mary. The King has been very
ill the whole week, and continues so.

14th.—A bad bulletin, and the most attached seem hopeless of the King’s
recovery.

15th.—The King has been dangerously ill all to-day, and has taken no
nourishment—his mind more distracted than ever, and his fever very high.
Willis was up with him all last night, and Sir Henry Halford stays. I
was at Lady Ilchester’s in the evening.

16th.—The King took three jellies, and had a little sleep this morning.
The account in the evening was the same, and that no new symptoms had
appeared.

17th.—I was with the Queen, the Princesses Elizabeth and Mary, the Dukes
of Cambridge and Cumberland, at Frogmore. The King a little, but _very
little_, better; all the physicians remain. Great alarm in London.

18th.—The Prince came to Windsor for a short time, and had a
conversation with the Queen. There seems to be no amendment.

19th.—The Prince will not give away anything vacant by death or
resignation. The Ministers complain that Government cannot go on without
it. He tells them he reserves them for the King to fill up on his
recovery, and that it was _their_ fault that these difficulties
occurred, from the restraints they laid. He has sent Tucker to get money
from his Duchy of Cornwall, that he may not be obliged to Ministers.

29th.—During the last week nothing very material has taken place. The
King has been as ill as ever, and takes so little nourishment that it is
scarcely possible he can recover any strength—his mind as much deranged
as ever. I have been almost every evening with the Queen and Princesses
Elizabeth and Mary at Frogmore. Yesterday the King was taken up, and put
on his flannel gown; he took four basins of milk; and he was thought to
be not so weak as was apprehended.

August 5.—The last week passed nearly like the former. I went several
evenings with the Queen and Princesses Mary and Elizabeth to Frogmore.
The Queen read Thomson’s “Seasons;” but on Thursday the Queen’s Council
came unexpectedly to propose calling in more physicians, or, at least,
that a consultation might be held. The Prince came down several times.
The King had another paroxysm, and is still in a dreadful state of mind;
and will take nothing now but water and biscuit. A consultation was held
yesterday at Sir Henry Halford’s. John Willis, Munro, and Simmons were
the additional members. Simmons, however, would not give his opinion, as
he said he could not, without having seen the patient. He came from
Oxfordshire, through Windsor, for that purpose; but it was not
permitted, as the other two, J. Willis and Munro, had not seen his
Majesty.

7th.—Yesterday, Sir Henry Halford called and told me that when Lords
Aylesbury, Winchilsea, and the Archbishop of Canterbury came to propose
John Willis, the Queen, by the advice of the Prince, to whom she sent at
Sir Henry’s request, answered that she and all the family had taken a
solemn oath by which they promised the King that they never would admit
J. Willis to attend him again, and that from the information given in
1804, during his Majesty’s last illness, the Privy Council had declared
that the King’s objections were not without a foundation, in consequence
of which the then Ministers (Lord Sidmouth’s Administration) had sent
Simmons, a new person. Her Majesty, however, to prove that she had no
personal prejudice against J. Willis, and did not wish to exclude any
advice which might be supposed beneficial to the King, consented that a
consultation might be held, at which J. Willis, with the addition of
Drs. Simmons and Munro, might be present. This was held at Sir H.
Halford’s, and last night the answers were given. Princess Mary told me
this morning they only recommended acting as circumstances might
require, and suggested nothing new. The King was dreadfully ill last
night; and Willis even said they never attended one so ill, except a
gentleman who died within forty-eight hours after. Yesterday, amidst
much incoherent matter, he said, on a sudden: “The King is dying;” but
then went on to other ravings. This was told me last night by Miss
Goldsworthy. He is grown exceedingly thin, and scarcely takes any
nourishment.

14th.—The King has been nearly in the same state in which he was a week
ago. He takes more nourishment, but his mind is in as bad a state as
ever; and the worse the more food he takes. The Queen’s Council answered
that for _the present_ they would not insist on J. Willis being
admitted. They seem to have a notion of a right to _more_ than giving
_advice_. The Prince spent his birthday (the 12th) here. He came the day
before, and stayed till the 13th. He rode out with Princesses Sophia and
Augusta in the morning, and afterwards came to Frogmore, where the Queen
was with Princesses Elizabeth and Mary, and the Duke of Clarence; and I
was with her. The Duke of Cumberland came with the Prince. We sat long
at luncheon, and the Prince was very attentive. The Duchess of York came
to dinner, and all the Dukes were there, except the Duke of Sussex, who
is ill. I was with Princess Sophia one evening, and twice with Princess
Augusta. It seems the King has made no will, but it is thought he has
made two or three memorandums. The Prince has informed his sisters that
he means, in case of the King’s death, to have their incomes increased,
and to give them apartments at St. James’s, as also to keep a table for
them.

I went almost every morning to Frogmore with the Queen and Princesses
Elizabeth and Mary. The Queen read Rogers’s “Pleasures of Memory” and
Cowper’s “Task,” and planted little oaks and geraniums.

19th.—The King’s bodily health seems to be improved, but his mind
remains in as bad a state as ever. The Queen’s Council (which seems to
be very despotically inclined) insisted on bark being given him. The
Prince spent the Duke of York’s birthday here, as did all the family.
Was every morning with the Queen, except Saturday and Sunday, and she
read Cowper’s “Task.”

26th.—The King is certainly rather better; for he sleeps, takes
nourishment, is not always so violent, and sometimes talks a little
rationally, at least within the last three days. Great apprehensions
have been entertained for the Duke of Sussex; and, though better, he is
thought to be in a very bad way. All the family met to spend the Duke of
Clarence’s birthday (the 21st) here. I was with the Queen and Princesses
Mary and Elizabeth most mornings at Frogmore. The Queen read Cowper and
Cicero’s “Letters,” and took me with her in the little carriage, drawn
by a pony.

September 3.—There seems to be little if any difference in the state of
the King. On Saturday the Queen’s Council presented a petition, signed
by all but Lord Winchilsea and the Bishop of York, requesting that her
Majesty would send for Simmons. Her reply was that she had _promised_
the King he should neither have Simmons nor Willis. Lord Winchilsea
wanted John Willis. I was every morning with the Queen and Princesses
Elizabeth and Mary at Frogmore, except Saturday and Sunday. The Queen
read Cicero’s “Epistles.” I was also with Princesses Augusta and Sophia.

9th.—Still the same uncomfortable state, and certainly no amendment. I
was with the Queen and Princesses as usual.

Yesterday, the 8th, was the fiftieth anniversary of the Queen’s
wedding-day. The Duke and Duchess of York, Duke of Clarence, and Duke of
Kent, dined with her. The Prince was prevented by business: he is just
returned from Lord Hertford’s.

16th.—Heberden and the other physicians quarrelling; the former thinking
the King better. It does not appear that there is any improvement. I was
not out much with the Queen this week. Looked over a manuscript of
English history for Princess Elizabeth. Went to Princess Augusta, &c.

Nothing very remarkable happened here in the last three months of 1811.
The King rather recovered his bodily health, but his mind remained the
same. No one allowed to speak to him but John Willis. The Queen began to
have small parties in her own drawing-room, consisting of the ladies and
gentlemen in waiting, on the week-days; on the Sundays only her lady of
the bedchamber and myself. On Christmas evening the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Lord Walsingham. The Prince fell down at Oatlands, and
hurt his foot and hand, which confined him a long while, and he took too
much laudanum.


                                [1812.]


On the 18th of February the Regency Act expired, and the Prince of Wales
became unfettered by Parliament, but continued the same Ministers in
office, and only wrote a letter to the Duke of York, desiring he would
offer to Lord Grey to join this Administration, and to communicate the
same to Lord Grenville. They refused to join, and those of his former
friends to whom the vacant Garters were offered, refused them, as they
did all places and honours. Lord Cholmondeley alone accepted a place.
Lord Hertford was made Chamberlain; and his son, Lord Yarmouth,
Vice-Chamberlain. Scandal very busy about the Prince and Lady Hertford.
Ten thousand pounds a year was added by Parliament to the Queen’s
income, and 3000_l._ to each of the Princesses, on which they were to
have an establishment of their own. They appointed one lady each:
Princess Augusta, Miss C. Onslow, getting for her the title of Lady;
Princess Elizabeth, the Dowager Lady Rosslyn; Princess Mary, Lady
Isabella Thynne; and Princess Sophia, Lady Mary Powlett. They at the
same time announced to the Queen their intention of sometimes making
visits to their brothers. They also took servants, and ordered carriages
for themselves. The Queen began to see a little more company, but only
those belonging to her, or very intimate friends. I asked leave to go to
Town, and into Essex and Suffolk for seven weeks, to return for the
Queen’s birthday. I went on Monday, the 30th of March, and stayed a week
in Town, four days with Lady Nepean, at Fulham, and on the 10th went to
Lord St. Vincent’s, at Rochetts, where I dined and slept that night. The
next day I went on to Harwich (dining at Colchester), and stayed two
days at Mrs. Deane’s, at Harwich. I went from thence on the 14th to Dr.
Norgate’s, at Ashfield, in Suffolk, and stayed a week there. On the 21st
I went to Bury, where I dined at Miss Norgate’s, and from thence came to
Halsted, and slept at Mrs. Urquhart’s. Next day arrived at Rochetts, and
stayed there till the 9th of May, when I came to Town. On the 11th,
Bellingham shot Mr. Perceval. I returned to Windsor on the 18th, and on
the following evening was at the Queen’s party. Princess Charlotte of
Wales, the Duchess of York, and Princess Sophia of Gloucester there.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               ANECDOTES.


[THE following anecdotes are selected from a large number, recorded by
Miss Knight mostly at the end of her journals. They were either written
from her own personal knowledge, or picked up by her in society, and set
down at the time in her note-books. They are of unequal interest, and if
not all new, are, at all events, authentic.]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Boswell being asked by Burke why he put so many absurdities into his
Life of Dr. Johnson, replied: “You, sir, have been guilty of greater
absurdities.” The other defied him to point them out. “Do you remember,”
asked Boswell, “when you said in Parliament, ‘We have the best of Kings
and the most grateful people?’” Burke replied, “You have reason.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Boswell was asked by the King how he would ever get through his work on
Dr. Johnson. “Sire,” said he, “I have a more difficult task than
that—how to call the unfortunate grandson of James II., whose adventures
in Scotland I propose to narrate.” “Why,” replied the King, “call him
the unfortunate grandson of James II.”[126]

                  *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Piozzi says she has been punished, like a vagabond, by hard labour
and a month’s confinement; and nine times in her life she has suffered
the same fate.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Lord Nelson says, that when he was seventeen years of age, he won
300_l._ at a gaming-table; but he was so shocked on reflecting that, had
he lost them, he should not have known how to pay them, that from that
time to this he has never played again.

                  *       *       *       *       *

When Admiral Nelson’s arm was cut off, the surgeon asked if he should
not embalm it, to send it to England to be buried; but he said, “Throw
it into the hammock with the brave fellow that was killed beside me”—a
common seaman.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As we were going in the Admiral’s barge the other day, looking at the
ships and talking of the victory (of the Nile), Sir William Hamilton
could not be pacified for the French calling it a drawn battle: “Nay, it
was a drawn battle,” said the Admiral, “for they drew the blanks and we
the prizes.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Queen of Naples desired to have a portrait of Nelson. Little Prince
Leopold said he would get a copy, and stand continually opposite to it,
saying, “Dear Nelson, teach me to become like you.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Captain Troubridge wrote to condole with Captain Darby, of the
_Bellerophon_, for his wounds and the number of people killed in his
ship; but added, that had his sufferings been fifty times as much, _he_
had rather have been in his place than have borne the anguish he felt
from running aground and being kept out of the action; that he had found
great difficulty in keeping from shooting himself; and that he even then
frequently shed tears. Captain Darby and Captain Gould, who was present
when he received the letter, both wept.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The estate of Bronté, near Mount Etna, so called from one of the
Cyclops, was given by the King to Lord Nelson. It is a Dukedom, with
estates valued at between two and three thousand pounds sterling per
annum. His Majesty also presented him with a sword set with diamonds
which had belonged to his father, the King of Spain, accompanied by a
letter, saying, that as this was the sword with which his father had
conquered Naples, it ought to belong to Lord Nelson, who had recovered
that kingdom. Every officer who came in with good news received a
present from the Queen, of greater or less value, according to the
circumstances and his rank in our service. She also gave some very
valuable jewels to Lady Hamilton. The Order of St. Ferdinand was
instituted by the King for the recovery of his Italian States, and
crosses were bestowed upon our officers, and upon the Neapolitan
Ministers, and others attached to the Court who had followed the Royal
Family to Palermo. A Neapolitan one day remarked that this Order had not
been conferred on a single Sicilian. A gentleman of the island being
present, and thinking this was said in an invidious manner, replied,
“His Majesty is perfectly right to give his new Order to the few
Neapolitans who have remained faithful. Had he given it to us, it must
have been to every inhabitant of the island, for all have been true to
him.” The Sicilians certainly did show great loyalty, and were delighted
with the presence of their sovereign, but it must also be remembered
that they had a deep-rooted and hereditary dislike to the French. They
always spoke with pride of the Sicilian Vespers, and would at any time
have been ready to repeat them. Similar feelings prevailed in Sardinia
and Malta, without any historical motive, but there is an independence
in the character of islanders which is not easily overcome, unless
biased by commercial speculations.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Turkish squadron, commanded by Cadir Bey, came to Palermo (1799),
with two other ships of the line beside his own, under the orders of a
Vice and a Rear-Admiral, and a frigate called the _Eagle of the Sea_,
the Captain of which was a young man related to the Grand Seignior, whom
the Turks called “the mad Prince,” because he was very romantic. I
recollect that one day, while walking in the garden, he happened to see
my little dog, which he took up in his arms, and recited some verses to
it, apparently with great affection. There was a Greek, who kept a
coffee-house at Palermo, and served as interpreter to the Turkish
officers, but he could not exactly translate these verses, and all I
could learn was that they were “extempore.” He then told me that the
Prince had desired him to say that one day, as he was riding along the
shore of the Bosphorus, a spirited horse threw him into the sea, when a
dog jumped in after and saved him; for which reason he had imposed on
himself the duty of paying a compliment in verse to those animals
whenever he found a proper opportunity for so doing. A beautiful fête
was given at the palace for the recovery of the kingdom of Naples, in
the name of Prince Leopold, who was then about nine years of age. His
tutor and the Queen made all the arrangements, and the former composed a
very pretty cantata on the occasion. The Turkish Admiral went in the
carriage with us; the Vice and Rear-Admirals, with the Captain of the
_Eagle of the Sea_, in another, but we could not persuade the latter to
put on a caftan like the others. He insisted on going in his short dress
and trousers, with bare arms and ankles, declaring that it was
disrespectful to appear before the Queen in “a great coat;” just as we
should think it wrong to wear a shawl in the presence of their
Majesties. His turban was adorned with fine jewels. His dress was of
purple silk, richly embroidered with silver, and his slippers of the
same colour, which exclusively belongs to members of the imperial
family. His linen was remarkably fine, and beautifully washed; his
trousers were equally _recherché_, and without doubt he was the model of
a Constantinopolitan dandy.

After the performance of the concert there was a magnificent firework,
representing the blowing up of _L’Orient_ at the battle of the Nile. The
Turks were delighted with this compliment to our navy, but the Russians
did not appear equally well pleased. The gardens were beautifully
illuminated.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Honourable Samuel Barrington, the younger son of an Irish Peer, was
sent into the Navy in his extreme youth, and at an early age was made a
post-captain. He was one of those very few persons who have many friends
and scarcely one enemy. He was not brilliant in understanding, and his
appearance was plain, but his heart was excellent. He loved his friends,
was charitable and humane to an extensive circle, and constantly kind
and liberal to his family.

He was a good officer, and of the right school. Not ambitious, neither
was he eager after fame. He wished to do his duty, and he did it well.
If he had ambition in any the slightest degree, it was to get on in the
service without making use of the powerful interest of his brother, who
was for many years in the Ministry; and for this purpose he endeavoured
to have his ship better manned, to get under weigh sooner, be sooner out
of dock, &c. &c., than other people. It is not impossible that his rank
in life was often of service to him on these occasions, but it was not
his intention to avail himself of that advantage. He was a father to his
officers and seamen, and was so generally liked in the Navy, that it was
remarked that no company of sea-officers ever met without drinking his
health.

When he was an Admiral he never desired to be a commander-in-chief, for
he did not like responsibility, and he was envious of no man. He spent
his fortune in hospitality and acts of charity, avoiding all
ostentation, not only because he had no taste for it, but because he
would not hurt the feelings of his brother officers by living in a
manner which those of more limited incomes could not have imitated
without distressing themselves.[127] He was never violent in politics,
and hatred seemed banished from his nature. I believe Admiral Barrington
to have been a sincere Christian.

His conduct at Santa Lucia, both in taking the island and afterwards in
defending it against the infinitely superior force of D’Estaing, was
greatly applauded. In answer to the haughty letter in which the French
commander exhorted him to give up a place which he could not defend
against such inequality of force, he only returned him his letter,
crossed over with two long scratches of his pen, and defeated him
completely.

Admiral Barrington was desired by my mother to be her executor and my
guardian, with the two Admirals Drake, in case she died before I was of
age. But though he survived my mother, her life was mercifully spared to
me for many years after that period; and he died before my return to
England, after a long illness, which kept him chiefly at Bath during the
last years of his existence.

                  *       *       *       *       *

I remember a young officer of the French Navy saying one day: “I should
like to be an English Peer until I reached thirty-five. I would then be
a Marshal of France till fifty, and afterwards come to Rome, be a
Cardinal, and never die.” The same officer, looking at the fine picture
of the “Magdalen,” by Guido, exclaimed: “Oh, what a lovely picture! I
have always liked Magdalens in every stage of their existence.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Signor Balbi was surprised to find that there was no Burgundy left in
his cellar, when he wanted to place some before a party of friends who
were dining with him at his country villa. “Ah!” said he, “it must have
been that Englishman, Lord Fortrose, who has been staying here some days
with my wife, that has drank it. Ah! I never thought of my wine.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Bishop of Parma said, that in that climate they had “nove mesi
d’inverno, e tre d’inferno.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

It often happened in Genoa that, when any one was building, or repairing
his house, his opposite neighbour, if he thought it so high as to be
inconvenient to himself, or disagreeable for any other reason, had it
fired at with musket-shot, or at least pelted with stones. This
occurred, whilst we were there, to the house of Signor Negroni.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Archbishop of Genoa hearing an Abbé say that the earth moved round
the sun, told him he was astonished at his impiety in flatly
contradicting the Scriptures, which say, “Terra autem stat.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Madame de Staël, daughter of M. Necker, being at a ball with a lady,
daughter of the late M. de Guichen, Lieutenant-General of the Marine,
for whom she was in mourning, kept tormenting the latter to dance. The
lady replied that she could not dance while she was in mourning for her
father; but Madame de Staël still importuned her, until she said:
“Consider, madam, if you had had the misfortune to lose your father,
could you think of dancing so soon?” “Oh!” returned the other, with a
haughty air, “there is such a difference between fathers and fathers.”
“True, madam,” replied her companion, “there is a great difference. My
father served his king and his country during sixty years—yours in a
fortnight has ruined both.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Two Frenchmen of the lowest order, talking of the present condition of
their country as they were crossing the Rhône, one of them said it was
delightful to be equal to the nobility and gentry. “True,” replied the
other, “it would have been pleasant to have been upon an equality with
them while they were something; but now we have brought them down and
ruined them, I do not see what we have gained by being equal to them.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Princess of Monaco stayed here a few days after the Prince’s
departure, in the hope that the revolution aimed at by the aristocratic
party would take place. When she received an express from the Prince,
she wept bitterly while she read his letter, and then immediately
ordered post-horses and set off, exclaiming: “Adieu, mon palais! adieu,
mes honneurs! Je ne suis plus rien.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Corsicans having lately heard that they were to be restored to
Genoa, represented to the Government that, rather than be given to their
former masters, they begged that France would bestow them on the person
to whom Louis XI. formerly gave the Genoese. During the reign of that
monarch the Genoese sent Ambassadors to his Court, with instructions to
place the republic under the protection of France. “Les Gênois,” said
they, “se donnent à votre Majesté.” “Et moi,” answered the King, “je les
donne au diable.”

A Venetian, being asked by a German where his countrymen got their lion
with wings, replied: “We caught him in the same forest where you found
your two-headed eagle.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Linnæus hated Buffon. He used to say that Buffon’s eloquence would
mislead the world so as to make it believe his lies. One day, being at
dinner with the mother of the present King of Sweden (Gustavus III.), at
her country-house at Drottningholm, he saw a portrait of himself and one
of Buffon in the room. He rose from table, and begged she would take
away one or the other, for he would not have his portrait in such
company. When very old, he used to go out herborising with several
hundred students of the University of Upsal. He had a trumpet with him,
by which the signal was given to call his scholars around him when he
found any plant particularly curious. They also brought to him all that
they had collected, which he classified and explained to them, sitting
down upon the grass. He was simple in his habits and behaviour. He could
speak French very well, but would not, because he hated the nation. He
also spoke German, and a little English. He was much beloved. When the
funeral service was performed over him, the man who had been gardener
for twenty years of the botanical nursery he had established, came and
strewed his grave with boughs of cypress—which Linnæus had introduced
into Sweden—and with the most curious exotics in the garden.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Piedmontese called all the Genoese “Bacciacini,” that being a common
name at Genoa. When they met any of the inhabitants of that city in the
streets of Turin, they plagued them by calling out: “Bacciacini, dom,
dom, dom”—imitating the sound of the great bell for assembling the
Consiglietto.

                  *       *       *       *       *

An Italian at Vienna was telling a lady how long he had been travelling,
and pronouncing French according to the manner of his nation, he said:
“J’ai été un _âne_ à Paris et un _âne_ à Rome.” “Mon cher Abbé,” replied
the lady, “il paraît que vous avez été un âne partout.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

M. Lageswärd said, in the presence of Baron de Wrangel, that the latter
had the reputation in Sweden of being very fertile in point of
gallantry. “Why, no, indeed, my dear friend,” answered the Baron; “I
have really been very constant; but consider, when a man has been making
love near sixty-five years, how many mistresses he must necessarily have
had.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Signor Michel Angelo Cambiaso, who was long a prelate in Rome, said that
in that city two things are eternal—the women and the friendships.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A few years since a Russian lady of high rank—who had escaped from her
own country, either on account of her being acquainted with some
circumstances relative to the death of the late Emperor (Peter III.), or
because she had some right to the crown by inheritance—stayed a few
months in Italy, and the Grand-Duke of Tuscany told her he would answer
for her safety so long as she remained at Florence, but that he would
not advise her to trust to any Russian. Count Orloff, however, became
intimately acquainted with her, and paid great court to her, till at
last he persuaded her to partake of an entertainment on board the
Russian fleet, at that time anchored off Leghorn. Notwithstanding the
advice of many persons, she went on board, and has never since been
heard of. It is supposed that she was thrown into the sea. Count Orloff
despatched a messenger to his imperial accomplice as soon as he had
secured his prisoner.[128]

                  *       *       *       *       *

When Lord Bruce and Mr. Brand were at Paris, arms and liveries had been
abolished about three weeks. The people came and stared at the coronet
on Lord Bruce’s carriage, and at the motto, “Fuimus.” Luckily, said Mr.
B., none of the Dames de la Halle understood Latin. The populace looked
at the Ambassadress’s footmen in livery as the most extraordinary sight
in the world, though so short a time had elapsed since they had been
accustomed to see everybody’s servants dressed after that fashion.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Mr. B. going to make a visit at Cambridge to Prince William, son of the
Duke of Gloucester, saw a fiddle on the table, and, taking it up, asked
the tutor if his Royal Highness played. “Not much,” said the other;
“only God save his uncle, and such little things.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Signor Stefano Lassagna said the war of ’46 spoiled all the etiquette of
Genoese society. Formerly the gentlemen behaved much more politely to
the ladies, and he himself remembered the time when Prince Doria walked
beside the chair of Madame Morando with his hat off, in a great fall of
snow, though he had his own chair following behind.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A general reform having been instituted at Genoa in the signs of inns
and taverns, no saints or foreign sovereigns were to be allowed. The man
who kept the “Santa Marta” being ordered to take down that sign, put up
“Albergo Imperiale” in its stead. He was then told that the Emperor did
not rule in Genoa, and so he next stuck up the arms of the republic,
with the motto “Libertas,” and he calls his inn “La Libertà.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Prince Chigi, who was condemned to perpetual imprisonment for attempting
to poison Cardinal Carandini, resided at Genoa, and went by his own
name. He paid a visit to Signor Bernardo Pallavicini, brother of the
Doge, and was lodged at the “Santa Marta” (La Libertà). His servants
cooked for him in his own apartments. Mr. Devonport, who had rooms near
his, complained of the noise of scraping pots and dishes, and was
answered by the people of the house that they had made the same
objections, but had been told that the Prince had hired the rooms and
would cook as he pleased.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Signora Marina Spinola having arranged to marry her daughter to the
son of Signor Dominico Serra, said she did not mention the
circumstance to her till all was settled, because the young man is
agreeable; but had he been ugly, she would have told her at once, to
accustom her to the idea. One Sunday the bridegroom went with his
father and mother and all their family, even to nephews and nieces, to
visit the bride, Signora Spinola having also invited her relations to
be present on the occasion. The visitors arrived about half-past five,
when the young lady was to kiss the hand of her future mother-in-law,
which the latter was to endeavour to prevent: however, she succeeded
very dexterously in doing it. Signora Serra went away early, but left
the sposo, telling Signora Spinola that he would stay till she sent
him away. This puzzled Signora Spinola, but she arranged the matter
with Signor Cheeco Viale, who, at half-past seven, told the young man
it was time to walk home. All the time of the visit the latter sat on
a sofa beside the young lady, talking to her on indifferent subjects.
The next day Signora Spinola, her husband, and a friend, went to
return the visit of Signora Serra, when the latter requested her to
charge herself with the care of providing the marriage outfit—which is
always furnished by the parents of the bridegroom—excusing herself on
the plea of ill health and the absence of her daughter. She added,
that she intended to spend as much as she had done for the daughter of
Prince Doria, who was married to another of her sons. Signora Spinola
at first demurred to spending another person’s money, but finally
accepted the commission. In the contract it was to be inserted that
the marriage should take place before September, and the Serra family
wished it to be in June. The young man was to be dispensed from the
ancient custom of watching to meet the young lady whenever she went
out with her mother, and he was to be allowed now and then to visit at
the house. They were to live with Signora Spinola for a year and a
half, or two years, until a house could be fitted up for them.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The King and Queen of Naples were wonderfully pleased with Rome, though
they had taken a prejudice against it. They were magnificently treated
at the Pontine Marshes at the Pope’s expense. The carriage of the gold
plate, provisions, &c., alone cost 150 crowns, and the dinner itself not
less than 600 crowns. When General Acton met the King on the frontier,
he asked if his Majesty would take any refreshment, but the King
declined, saying that he had eaten enough for three days. At Rome they
invented a conversation, supposed to have taken place between the Pope,
the King and Queen of Naples, General Acton, and the Queen’s Confessor.
The Pope says, “Io concedo tutto;” the King, “Io voglio tutto quel che
vuole la Regina;” the Queen, “Io voglio tutto;” Acton, “Io rubo tutto;”
the Confessor, “Io assolvo tutto;” and the Devil, in a corner of the
picture, “Io porto via tutti.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The marriage contract of Signora Costanza Falconieri and Count Onesti
was signed on Thursday, the 31st of May. There were twenty-four
Cardinals present, chiefly creations of this Pope, the four prelates in
the principal charges that lead to the red hat—that is, the Governor,
the Maggiordomo, the Auditore della Camera, and the Treasurer, but as
the latter was already a Cardinal, he could not sign the contract, and
therefore deputed Monsignor Doria to do so in his place. Twenty-two
o’clock (six P.M.) was the hour, and Signora Mobilia had the candles
lighted, that the ceremony might be more imposing. * * * Early on the
morning of Monday, June 4, the sposa, accompanied by her mother and
grandmother, &c. &c., went to the Vatican, where the Pope said mass in
the Chapel Sestina. After hearing a second mass, he married his nephew
and the young lady, making an exhortation twenty-two minutes in length.
He began by giving good advice to the sposa, and then addressed the
sposo, and afterwards himself, saying that it was in that place (the
Sestine Chapel) he was first married to the Church, and lamenting the
many errors he had committed since he was Pope, notwithstanding his most
ardent desires for the good of the Church. There were no ladies present
but those of the family, many of whom were of all conditions. After the
ceremony they went down to the Maggiordomo’s apartments, where a
collation had been prepared, and then proceeded to the church of San
Marcello, in the Corso, to pay their devotions in the chapel of the
Beata Giulia Falconieri, an ancestor of the family, and a considerable
saint. They next made their devotions at the little church of the
Bergamaschi, in the Piazza Colonna, and thence repaired to the house of
the sposo, Palazzo Braschi, where they all remained an hour and a half,
and afterwards dined at the Palazzo Falconieri. The Senatress told the
sposa she gave her joy on her wedding, and also on the presents she had
received. “I had not so many when I married the Pope’s nephew; but
then,” added she, “_I_ did not want them.” An Abbé, standing at Count
Braschi Onesti’s door when they came home from the marriage, exclaimed:
“What a fine breed of horses he has brought with him from Cesena!” They
were so enraged at this speech that they had him arrested and sent to
prison. The Prince Borghese presented Count Onesti with a pair of fine
horses. Some said that the latter asked for them, and others that he
offered to buy them, but that the Prince answered they were for his own
use. However, he understood the Count’s meaning, and sent them off to
the Maggiordomo.

                  *       *       *       *       *

François Joachim de Pierre de Bernis was of an old family of gentle
blood, whose hereditary estate was near Pont St. Esprit, in Languedoc.
He had great taste and talent for Anacreontic poetry. His compositions
were lively and elegant, but rather too highly coloured, and by no means
instructive for youthful readers. It was, no doubt, the error of the
times and of the nation. He was of a short stature, and I do not think
that either his features or person could ever have been remarkable for
beauty, and yet he was universally known in his youth as “le joli petit
abbé,” and “l’aimable abbé.” His mind was very liberal, and his temper
generous and disinterested, but he seems to have been always somewhat
too indiscriminate, or too tolerant, in the choice of his acquaintance.
His circumstances were limited, so that during his early years he was
often subjected to great pecuniary embarrassments; but he was always
cheerful, always the gentleman, and always well received. He established
the necessary proofs of ancestry for becoming a Canon of the Noble
Chapter of St. Jean de Lion, of which he wore the cross to the last day
of his life, with more pleasure than any other of his numerous
decorations, for the consciousness of birth made his other honours sit
easy on him. He gained the favour of Madame de Pompadour by his verses
and the charms of his society, for no one ever said more amiable things
in fewer words, or more to the purpose. She was not, however, his only
friend, or the sole cause of his promotion, as it has been often
reported. A memoir he wrote on the dispute be tween the Jesuits and
Parliament pleased the King (Louis XV.), and, besides, he was generally
popular, and had great and powerful protectors, through whom he was sent
Minister to Venice. While he was there, the husband of the beautiful
Princess de Rohan died. The Princess and he had long been attached to
each other, and he knew that she would propose to marry him, but he felt
that he would be regarded as too much her inferior with respect to rank
and fortune to make a graceful figure in the world. He therefore took
priest’s orders when he heard that the Prince was so ill that the next
courier might bring tidings of his death. This does not sound well; but
it did not forfeit him the friendship of the Princess, for, when she
died, she left him her whole fortune, which he nobly gave up to the
Rohans, merely reserving for himself a ring, on which was a Moor’s head,
and this he wore until his death in remembrance of her. At his return
from Venice he was made Prime Minister, but was soon displaced by the
Choiseul party, when he was created a Cardinal, but exiled to one of his
abbeys; subsequently he was allowed to live at his archbishopric of
Alby. Restored to some degree of favour when Louis XVI. ascended the
throne, he was appointed Minister Plenipotentiary of His Most Christian
Majesty at the Court of Rome, whither he had gone for the Conclave of
Ganganelli. There he shone with the greatest splendour. His revenues
were enormous, and he expended them most generously. Indeed, his
liberality to his own countrymen, his hospitality to the natives and to
travellers, his charity to the poor, and his beneficence to his own
family, were only limited by his income. He never wished to save, but
could not bear the idea of debt. His house and table were sumptuous, his
conversation lively and animated, his manners polished, his expressions
guarded, and his behaviour dignified and correct.

We had letters of recommendation to Cardinal de Bernis when we first
went to Rome, and were intimately acquainted with him and his family,
particularly with his amiable niece, the Marchioness du Puy-Montbrun,
and his adopted nephew and coadjutor, M. de Bernis, who was afterwards
his successor. The Cardinal was dismissed from his post at Rome, on
refusing to take the oath exacted by the Revolutionists, and deprived of
his benefices in France. He had a pension, however, from Spain, and
received into his house at Rome, where he continued to reside, Mesdames
Adelaide and Victoire, the sisters of Louis XVI. He bore his change of
fortune with dignity and temper, and died about eighteen months before
the French took possession of Rome. He left behind him a poem on
religion, which he gave orders to have printed after his death; and
Memoirs of the most active period of his life, intended only for the
gratification of his own family, with positive instructions that they
should never be made public. The following lines were written by a lady
of Alby, to be placed beneath two small medallions, representing the
Cardinal and his nephew, the coadjutor:

               Alby! tes deux prélats au temple de Mémoire
               Attesteront du ciel la plus rare faveur;
               Quand il eut fait l’un pour la gloire,
               Il fit l’autre pour ton bonheur.

                  *       *       *       *       *

When the Cardinal de Bernis was to receive the red hat, he knew that
eight days afterwards he would be exiled from the Court. He was then
Prime Minister. The morning he was to go to the King he got up at two,
and wrote till eight, when he went to the palace and received the hat,
and addressed complimentary discourses to all the Royal Family. He then
returned to his own house, and had five tables set out for company,
consisting of all the Ministers and clergy. After dinner the King sent
for him to the Council, which he left late at night, and went home and
wrote till two in the morning. The pomp with which he was surrounded was
immensely magnificent—all the royal carriages attending him. The Duke of
Fitzjames, who was standing with him at the entrance of his house,
remarked: “Quel beau jour pour vous, Monseigneur!” “C’est plutôt un beau
parapluie,” replied the Cardinal; but the Duke being ignorant of his
approaching downfall did not understand him. The Cardinal said, he
remarked, while he was pronouncing his discourses, that the courtiers
were endeavouring to find expressions that they could lay hold of, to
bring up against him afterwards. Eight days later he was exiled to his
abbey of Visurenne, where for the space of one year he was not permitted
to see any one but the members of his own family. During the two
following years he was allowed to see company, and then sent to his
archbishopric of Alby. The greatest demonstrations of joy, such as the
ringing of bells, the firing of guns, troops drawn up to salute, &c.,
were exhibited all along his journey through Languedoc. While at
Visurenne he used to dress in grey, lined with red, with a white hat and
a red riband round it, like a shepherd.

                  *       *       *       *       *

After the Cardinal de Bernis was recalled from exile he went to Paris,
and happened to be in company with the Duchess de Grammont, sister of M.
de Choiseul, who was then Minister. She took occasion to introduce the
subject of exile, and said it must be the most disagreeable thing in the
world. “Madam,” replied the Cardinal, “it is the most disagreeable thing
possible when you are expecting it, but the most agreeable when it is
over.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Venetian Ambassador wrote the other day to the Vicegerent
(substitute of the Cardinal-Vicar), requesting him to make inquiries
about a young couple who had run away from Venice, and who, the Senate
informed him, were concealed in Rome. The Vicegerent sent back the
Ambassador’s letter with these words at the bottom of it: “Si burla di
me il Signore Ambasciadore” (Monsieur l’Ambassadeur se moque de moi).
The latter again wrote to the Vicegerent, and more urgently than before,
but received only the same answer. Whereupon he called in person upon
the prelate, who told him that the young couple were in the palace at
Venice.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Count d’Artois carried his little son, the Duke d’Angoulême, to see
the young Dauphin. The child, expecting to see something extraordinary,
looked disappointed, and exclaimed: “Mon papa, comme il est petit!” “Tu
le trouveras un jour beaucoup trop grand,” replied the Count.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Père Procureur of the Order of Doctrinaires came to make us a visit,
and said that he was trying to get the founder of his order canonised,
provided it did not cost too much. He had already expended six hundred
crowns on the congregations before whom the question has to be laid.
These are composed of prelates, heads of orders, and cardinals; but he
believes the last do not receive anything. Every congregation costs a
hundred and fifty crowns in chocolate; the lawyer gets twenty more for
his carriage and other expenses; and the rest goes in _mancias_ to the
servants. The Prelate Promoter of the Faith is usually styled “Avvocato
del Diavolo,” his business being to raise objections to the proposed
saint. The present candidate for canonisation is of an ancient family of
Avignon. His brother was a “chef d’escadre,” and he himself was in the
army of Henri IV. At that time he used to make verses to the ladies, and
was a man of the world; but he afterwards turned abbé, and founded an
order for the instruction of children. His name was César de Busse. They
are now trying to prove his virtues to “an heroic degree,” and
afterwards they will come to his miracles, without which he cannot be
beatified. It is somewhat difficult to find proofs of these, but they
hope to succeed, provided the order in France find money enough; but
there seems to be some reluctance to spend much for these purposes.
Connected with this, the Père Procureur related to us an anecdote of one
of the Boromeo family, who told us his son need not give himself so much
trouble, for they would never try to make a saint of him, as his uncle’s
canonisation had already ruined them. The feast of a beatified saint is
not observed by the Church in general, but only by his own order.

                  *       *       *       *       *

When Marshal Richelieu went to Bordeaux he was tired out with harangues
from all sorts of people. At last they told him that the Gardien of the
Capucins wanted to address him, but the Marshal vowed he would hear no
more. Being prevailed on, however, by the people about him not to
mortify the poor man, he said he would receive him provided his
discourse were brief. The Capucin, then entering, said: “Monsieur le
Maréchal, nous vous souhaitons autant de bien dans l’autre monde que
vous en avez eu dans celui-ci.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

When Marshal Villars was going to give battle to the allied army, he
looked at his troops, whose uniforms had become very shabby, and said to
them, pointing to the new regimentals of the enemy: “Habillez-vous, mes
amis.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The harlequin at the Comédie Italienne at Paris called for a seat, and
they brought him a chair. “Non, non,” said he, “ce siége n’est pas assez
long. Je voudrais m’appuyer. Donnez-moi un autre siége: donnez-moi un
siége comme celui de Port-Mahon.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

A Neapolitan Prince, being on his death-bed, sent for his confessor,
and, after making a long confession, he said there was one thing he had
omitted because he had not courage to tell it. After much difficulty and
many exhortations, the friar prevailed upon him to impart the secret.
“Father,” said he, “I can never hope to be saved, for I have fought a
duel.” The confessor reproved him in suitable terms, but added, that his
repentance would ensure his pardon. “Oh, father!” exclaimed the Prince,
“there were aggravating circumstances. The dispute was occasioned by my
saying that Tasso was superior to Ariosto, and we fought three times on
that account.” “It was very improper, to be sure,” replied the friar,
“to have risked your own life and that of a fellow-creature for so
slight a reason, but you may hope to be forgiven.” “It is impossible,
father,” persisted the Prince, “for though I disputed so vehemently, I
have never read a line of either Tasso or Ariosto.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

When the Archduke Maximilian was at Paris, he went to see the Cabinet du
Roi. M. de Buffon was there to receive him, and presented his Imperial
Highness with a copy of his works, elegantly bound; but the Archduke
said, he could not think of robbing him. He went likewise to the Ecole
Militaire, where the young gentlemen were going to be put through their
exercises for his amusement, but he said he did not wish to fatigue
them. The Parisians called him the “Archi-bête d’Autriche.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

When Pope Lambertini went to see the Opera House fitted up for the
cantata which the Duke de Nivernois gave on the birth of the present
King of France (Louis XVI.), the prelate who was in attendance wanted to
take off the “stola,” thinking! that it was not decent so sacred a habit
should appear in a theatre, but the Pope prevented him, calling him a
“minchione” (a blockhead). Somebody wrote over the door, “Indulgenza
pleniaria.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

When the Bishop of Derry was at Rome, he refused to help a French
gentleman at Cardinal de Bernis’ table to some olives, saying he “would
not give the olive to France.” The Marquis de Fortia replied, “And yet
it is the duty of your profession to do so, milord.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the road from Naples to Rome the Cavaliere Lascaris was much annoyed
at the slow pace the postilion went. He called out to him several times
to go quicker, but the man always excused himself by abusing the Pope
for keeping such bad roads. On reaching the end of the stage the
Cavalier caned him handsomely; and, that the people around might not
take the postilion’s part, he went on saying what a rascal he was to
abuse his sovereign, such a good prince, too, &c. &c. The other then
protested that he did not mean the present Pope, he meant Pope
Rezzonico. “Worse and worse,” cried the Cavalier, “for he was a saint. I
must beat you all the more.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

When the Duke of Arcas was sent by the King of Spain to congratulate the
King and Queen of Naples on the birth of their eldest child, Ganganelli,
who was then Pope, knew that the Duke had received instructions from his
sovereign to press for the extinction of the Order of Jesuits. He
resolved, therefore, to give the envoy no opportunity of addressing him
on the subject. The Spanish Ambassador at Rome mentioned to the Pope’s
confidant, Padre Bontempi, that he hoped his Holiness would treat the
Duke with distinguished civility, as he was charged with a special
mission. To which the Padre replied, that he could assure him the Duke
should be received in a manner that would fully content him. When he
arrived, the Pope was staying at the Castle Gandolpho, and he sent the
Maestro di Camera and the Maggiordomo to receive the Duke at the door,
the greatest compliment that can be shown even to a sovereign. The Pope
was standing when he entered the room, and when he was about to kneel to
kiss the feet of his Holiness, the latter prevented him, took him in his
arms and embraced him, and seated him on a sofa beside himself. As the
Duke made some difficulty about this, he said, “Do not look upon me as
the Pope, but as a friar.” He then conversed with the envoy on various
subjects, and kept up the conversation for half an hour, without
allowing him the slightest opportunity to speak upon his real business.
Padre Bontempi, according to previous arrangement, having made a sign
that it was dinner-time, the Pope said that he had already observed that
he was only a friar, and he lived like one, dining at twelve o’clock,
but the Maggiordomo would take care of him (the Ambassador), though
probably he would not fare so well as at the court of other sovereigns.
He then rose, accompanied the Duke to the door, and as he was going out,
said, “Remember me to Carluccio” (so he called the King of Spain), “and
tell him that I am a man of honour, and will keep my promise to him, but
he must give me time enough.” The Ambassador then took his leave,
enchanted with his reception.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As Mr. Hewetson was putting up a bust in the Pantheon one day, three
persons who had taken refuge in the church offered to help him. One of
them said he had done nothing wrong, but the corporal of the sbirri owed
him a grudge; and another declared that he was an honest man, he had
never stolen anything, he had only killed a man. When any one here is
taken up for a crime, the judge asks him his name, and some have been
cunning enough to reply, “Chiesa” (Church). The judge then says, “I have
taken an oath that I would never attempt anything against the Church,
and therefore, as that is your name, you must go before the tribunal of
Ecclesiastical Immunities.” The man is accordingly sent there, and soon
afterwards returned to the judge, with a message, telling him that he
may do what he pleases, he will not offend the Church. But if the
prisoner persists in saying that his name is Chiesa, the judge will have
nothing to do with him, and again refers him to the tribunal, and so the
affair drags on for ever. No man, besides, is ever condemned to death
unless he confesses his crime, but the torture is applied to extort the
confession. One poor wretch made a likeness of the gallows, and stuck it
on his foot, that he might remember in the midst of his sufferings that
it was worse to be hanged. Many outlaws are living at Ostia, but all for
homicide and assassination. They would think it a disgrace to their
society to allow a robber to live amongst them.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The following was one of the addresses to the young Dauphin:
“Monseigneur, votre naissance fait notre joie, votre éducation fera nos
espérances, et vos vertus feront notre bonheur.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The little Prince Santa Croce, about five or six years of age, had got
little Prince Giustiniani down, and kicked him most unmercifully. The
latter took refuge in a corner, but the other ordered him to come out,
that he might kick him again: “If you do not,” he added, “I’ll give you
a _coltellata_” (a stab).

                  *       *       *       *       *

As some officers of the Guards were showing off their troops to General
Elliot, with their fine feathers, pink stocks, &c. &c., he said they
only wanted one thing, which he had seen in Italy, and thought would be
a great improvement to them. Upon being asked what this was, replied,
“An umbrella;” which the Pope’s soldiers always carried.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Cardinal de Bernis said that Count Alfieri was very prodigal of
reflections, but very covetous of words.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Chevalier du Theil remarked to us, in speaking of a Minister who was
giving fêtes on some public occasion, “On s’ennuie à les préparer, on se
ruine à les faire, on est critiqué quand on les a faites.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The expense of Monseigneur de Bernis’ bishopric, including expedition of
bulls, presents, &c., amounted to about 480 Roman crowns. The Pope would
not take the price of the bulls, as he was entitled to do.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The King of Prussia called the Emperor Joseph II. the Quixote of the
North.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Marquis Castiglioni, as he was going to Naples, scolded his wife
because the cook’s carriage had broken down, which, he said, was owing
to her not having gone to mass in the morning before they set out. He
afterwards said it was the fault of the “femme de chambre,” whom he
abused dreadfully, but a few hours after desired the Marchioness to give
her two sequins.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A Jew of Pisa being very ill, ordered two Jew attendants to call in a
curate to baptise him, for that his conscience would not allow him to
die in peace without he became a Christian. He said he heard them in the
next room agree that they had better kill him than let him change his
religion. Upon that he desired so earnestly to be baptised, that an
angel, dressed in white, came down and christened him; and from that
moment he grew better. On his recovery he informed the Archbishop of
Pisa of the miracle, and the Archbishop wrote to Rome to know if the man
ought to be christened a second time. A Congregation was accordingly
appointed, at the head of which was the Vicegerent, Monseigneur
Contesini, and the Bishop of Carpentras went to Cardinal de Bernis, to
inquire if he thought that baptism by an angel was canonical. The
Cardinal replied, as gravely as he could, that perhaps it would be
better to rechristen the Jew, _conditionally_; and that as he had never
heard of any one being baptised by an angel, he could not say whether it
was canonical. He then asked them if they were certain that the angel
had really appeared; and they answered that there could be no doubt
about it, for the man had told it himself.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Duke de Chartres built some houses round the gardens of the Palais
Royal, with shops under them, in order to get money by letting them. He
was talking to the King of the beauty of one of his gardens, describing
the summer-houses, canals, &c.: “Y a-t-il des boutiques aussi?” asked
his Majesty. The people were so enraged at seeing the trees cut down and
the beauty of the gardens spoiled to build these houses, that they
hissed the Duke as he passed, and to escape the populace he ran through
a coffee-house and got away. Some one remarking his blue ribbon, called
out, “Est-ce la première fois qu’on a vu fuir le _Saint-Esprit_?” that
being the name of the ship he commanded in the engagement with Admiral
Keppel. A caricature was printed of a man picking up rags in the dirt,
and beneath it was written, “M. le Duc de Chartres, qui cherche des
loques à terre” (locataires). One day, while talking to a lady, he
described a friend of hers by various ill-natured signs, to which she
replied, “Je vois bien, Monseigneur, que vous vous entendez mieux aux
signalements qu’aux signaux.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Duchess de Chabot told me nothing struck her more disagreeably than
to see, at the end of a sentence of death, the King’s signature
following the words, “Tel est notre bon plaisir.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Pope Lambertini having heard that Ghezzi, the painter, had drawn
caricatures of him and of all the Sacred College, insisted on seeing his
book. The painter, in great terror, was obliged to comply; but the Pope
was so much pleased with his talent that he gave him an employment of
twelve crowns a month, and kept the book. Whenever a Cardinal came to
see him he would show him his portrait, and if it caused any
displeasure, he would say: “Do not be angry—here is my likeness also.”
The same Pope was told that a person had taken the liberty to publish a
book of his “bons mots,” and was urged to punish the fellow. He replied
that he would certainly do so, and would inflict a very severe
punishment, for, said he, “I will have a new edition printed with great
additions, and then nobody will buy the book he has been at the expense
of publishing.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Princess Dashkoff being at Cardinal de Bernis’ in carnival time, boasted
that she would not fear to face forty cannons, and yet started when the
petards were fired to give the signal for the race. She was asked if she
felt cold, and she answered that her imagination was colder than her
person. The Grand-Duke Paul of Russia told the young Prince Dashkoff
that he had already given him half of his friendship on his mother’s
account, and would give him the other half when he knew him better. He
agreed with the Princess to forget past times, and to think only of the
present. When he was in St. Peter’s, he said that such a church gave a
higher idea of the Divinity than any other temple he had ever entered.
He thought the columns were not perfectly proper for the support of so
noble an edifice, but he was too much struck with the general effect of
the building to examine its details. The city of Rome, he remarked,
offered the most august, and, at the same time, the most humiliating
spectacle in the world, as it showed to what a height men could attain,
and also how low they could descend.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Bagnall remarked, that, on meeting the Senator on the first day of
carnival in his state coach surrounded by his guards, and with pieces of
silk carried before him, it seemed to him as if the Romans wished to
perpetuate the memory of their disgrace, and show how far they had sunk
from their former position. If Cato could return on earth, what, he
asked, would be his idea on encountering Prince Rezzonico as the
representative of the Roman Senate, and Princess Santa Croce as the
representative of the Roman matrons—particularly at Carnival time?

                  *       *       *       *       *

Countess Kaunitz, at Vienna, cheated intolerably at cards. As she was
walking one day with Lord Finlater, a beggar asked alms of her, and she
desired his Lordship to give the man a sequin. Lord F. demurred to such
a large sum, but the lady insisted on his showing his generosity. “Ah!
je vois, madame,” said he, “que c’est un cousin de Pam.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

When the Prince of Hepenstein was at Paris, he was one day at Madame de
Barri’s toilette, surrounded with courtiers. She was saying how much she
wished to have a little tiger, and every one was recommending how it
should be fed. Some said with biscuits, others with macaroons, till the
Prince, tired of all this nonsense, suggested: “Give him, madam, a
courtier a day.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Princess Dashkoff said she thought the Polish nation the most servile in
the world till she saw the Italians.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Cardinal Zelada said that, when he was in the Conclave, another Cardinal
sent him an artichoke, which he presented to another Cardinal, who
passed it on to a third, until it came back to Cardinal Zelada. After
this had happened six times the latter terminated its travels by
throwing it out of the window, but not before it had cost him
twenty-five crowns. For it is customary when a Cardinal makes a present
to a “confrère,” to give at least two sequins to the secretary of the
donor, or to some other member of his household.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Of the innumerable friars secularised by the Emperor Joseph II., only
two hundred have proved fit to be employed as parish priests. The nuns
of the convents destroyed by his Majesty had permission to enter other
convents if they voluntarily chose to continue a monastic life. Scarcely
any of the German nuns have confined themselves a second time, and only
one in Lombardy, who has come to Rome for that purpose. The Pope has
allowed her a few days to see the city.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The King of Spain has been very anxious of late for the canonisation of
a lady who died about a hundred and fifty years ago. Two miracles are
necessary for this purpose, and only one could be proved to have been
performed during her lifetime. It was therefore proposed to supply the
other by the fact of her body having remained uncorrupted for such a
length of time. Accordingly the tomb was opened, in order to ascertain
whether the body had been preserved naturally or by being embalmed.
Unfortunately, it crumbled into dust as soon as it was exposed to the
air, which was held to be decisive against her sanctity. The King,
however, was so determined to have his way, that he caused a second
congregation to be convened, but the result has been as unfavourable to
his wishes as before.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It is said of the Duke de Chartres (afterwards Duke of Orleans, commonly
known as Philippe Egalité), that he was “paresseux sur mer, poltron sur
terre, polisson partout.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Two instances of the cruelty practised in convents came under the
Countess de Château Dauphin’s personal knowledge. One was of a friar
belonging to one of the mendicant orders at Turin, who was chained under
the cellar-stairs for ten years, fed upon bread and water, and kept in a
most shocking state. The other was of a friar who was confined for
twenty-five years in a room of a convent near her country house, where
he was deprived of the sight of a single human being—his food being
passed to him through a hole. Through the Count’s influence he was at
length set at liberty, and permitted to walk about the convent.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Emperor Joseph II. is called every morning before six, and rises
immediately, though he may have been sound asleep just before. While
dressing he reads papers, and by seven he receives the Council of State;
after which the Archduke Maximilian, if in Vienna, makes him a visit of
a few minutes, and they go together to church. The Emperor then proceeds
to his Chancellerie, where he dictates to several secretaries, keeping
them fully employed until twelve or one, when he holds a levee. About
half-past one, or two, he drives a calèche and pair to one of the gates
of the town, where a horse is awaiting him. He mounts and rides round to
see fortifications, buildings, gardens, &c., and, after using violent
exercise, returns home about half-past four, when the signal for the
Guards to salute him is also the signal to serve up the dinner. While
this is being done, which usually occupies seven minutes, the Emperor
dresses himself—he is always in uniform—and he remains less than half an
hour at table. He eats of the simplest dishes, and of not more than two
or three, talking all the time to architects, directors of his gardens,
&c. After dinner he walks about the room for a short time, when he
returns to the Chancellerie, and works assiduously till ten or eleven.
He then visits at one of about a dozen houses, to which he goes by
turns, almost all of them belonging to widows of general officers, and
the greater part Protestants. They are all elderly women, with the
exception of two—the Princess of Lichtenstein, wife of the General who
is his personal friend; and another lady, whose husband likewise is
particularly intimate with his Majesty, and works nearly as hard. About
midnight the Emperor returns to the palace, and as he passes through his
apartments sits down to the harpsichord for a quarter of an hour, his
valet de chambre accompanying him on the violin. He both plays and
sings, and the music is changed every night. He then goes to bed. Such
is his usual life at Vienna, but when he is with his troops he surpasses
them all in activity. Rain, tempests, long and fatiguing marches, are
alike disregarded.

                  *       *       *       *       *

M. de Chevert, who died a lieutenant-general of the French army, being
about to take a fortress by assault, gave the following instructions to
a soldier: “Tu monteras l’échelle; la sentinelle te criera ‘Qui est là?’
tu ne répondras rien; il te criera une autre fois; tu ne diras rien; il
te tirera, il te manquera; tu le tueras et moi je serai derrière toi.”
The soldier took his commander’s word, did as he was bid, and everything
happened precisely as M. de Chevert had stated.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A son of Count Sambuca, Prime Minister of the King of Naples, not long
since had a person assassinated. His father sent him off to Sicily, and
it is probable that no further notice will be taken of the murder.
Another son of the same Minister, as he was going to a conversazione at
Rome, observed that Cardinal Visconti’s carriage was in front of him,
and immediately ordered his coachman to drive past it. The man excused
himself by saying that it was not customary to pass a Cardinal; but
Signor Sambuca insisted, and gained his point. Cardinal Visconti, when
he alighted, unaware of the real state of the case, and being, besides,
a very civil man, told the other that he was exceedingly sorry for the
dispute between their coachmen, but that it was impossible to answer for
the behaviour of those people. “You are mistaken, Sir,” replied the
Neapolitan, “I ordered my man to pass you; ‘voi altri Cardinali ci
volete soverchiare in tutto.’”[129] However, he was soon afterwards
recalled to Naples by his father.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was mentioned lately at a conversazione of the second class that some
one had been murdered by a servant. An Abbé, who was one of the guests,
being accompanied by his servant on his way home, was asked by the man
if he knew whose servant it was, and he replied in the negative. “Why,
it was I, Sir,” said the fellow—“I killed the man myself.” The poor Abbé
was so much frightened at the intelligence that he ordered him to take
himself off, with his livery and lantern.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In Italy, they call people who hurt their health by painting,
tight-lacing, &c., “martiri del diavolo.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Prince Borghese gave a ball about a fortnight after his sister’s death;
whereupon it was written over his door next morning: “Dignum sororis
funus.” His mother has been dead about a month, and he is not yet in
mourning. Next month he proposes to give dances at his villa twice a
week.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Lord Lucan said that the Ambassador from Malta spoke amazingly good
French for an African.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Cardinal Hertzan, Minister of the Empire, having taken a palace through
the interest of the Empress Queen (Maria Theresa), wanted to turn out
the keeper of a coffee-house who lived in the palace. The man went to
consult a Friar Felice to know how he could manage to resist the
Cardinal. The friar told him that he saw no human means whereby he could
avoid his loss, but that God Almighty would perhaps prevent it. The
Cardinal being afterwards in danger of losing great part of his income
through the death of the Empress Queen, Friar Felice passed for a saint.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Prince Doria gave to the (newly-made) Cardinal Altimari a fine carriage,
with a pair of beautiful horses. Prince Borghese sent his tailor and his
merchant to the same Cardinal, desiring him to order as many suits for
himself, and as many liveries for his servants, as he thought proper. A
woman of the second order, the widow of an “expéditionnaire,” likewise
presented him with one thousand crowns in papetti, to give away as
“mancia” (“pour boire”—drinking-money), and defrayed all his briefs,
&c., for his new bishopric.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Romans called Signora Giulia Falconieri, “Papa Giulia.” The Pope’s
nephews being at the Opera with that lady, it was said, “Tutti li
Santissimi erano ad Aliberti.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

At La Valle, a guardian was introduced on the stage, who advised his
ward to keep good company, and to receive the nobility at her house, but
to have nothing to do with painters. Monsignor Ferretti, cavaliere
servente to the Baroness G., told her of this, and advised her to take
the hint with regard to a painter who is continually at her house. Upon
this a friend of hers went to the Governor and complained that the
comedians of La Valle had insulted Madame G.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Signor Pisani, a Venetian, having had great flirtations with a woman of
the second order at Rome, was told that he would not dare to continue
them when her cavaliere servente was present. He therefore went and sat
down upon the lady’s knees, and the cavaliere servente gave him three
boxes on the ear, which he took very quietly—merely remarking that he
was unfortunate in not having his pistols in his pocket. He afterwards
complained of the affront to the Venetian Ambassador, but a Roman lady
said to him that she wondered how he dared to enter the company of
ladies after an affair of that kind. The Viscount de la Rochefoucault
remarked that in Rome a man who gives a blow is generally considered “un
brutal,” and that he who receives it is pitied. The cavaliere servente
was said to be the gentleman of I forget what Prince; while Signor
Pisani belonged to the illustrious family which gave so many heroes to
the republic of Venice.

                  *       *       *       *       *

An Italian Countess was about to be interred one day, when an order
arrived from the Secretary of State for the body to be opened, on
suspicion of her death having been caused by poison. On examination it
was found to be so, and it was supposed that she was poisoned by a
servant who was bribed by her relations; for the deceased had been a
great devotee, and it was feared that, if she made a will, she would
leave all her money to the Church.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Elector-Palatine, after talking some time to the Princess Santa
Croce, went to pay his compliments to some other lady. Whereupon Signora
Mobilia Falconieri, the mother of the Princess, flew into a violent
passion, and told her daughter she wondered how she could submit to such
an affront. When _she_ was young, she would never have permitted a
gentleman to leave her to speak to any one else.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The following story was circulated in Rome, but it was denied by Prince
Chigi. While the Prince was hunting on one of his estates, about twenty
miles from Rome, a wild boar made great ravages on the lands of a poor
man, his vassal. The latter complained several times, but always in
vain, and at last one day shot the boar himself. The Prince’s
gamekeeper, who saw him do this, raised his gun, fired, and killed the
poor fellow on the spot. His widow presented a memorial to the Prince,
begging redress of her wrongs, but he sent it back to her, with this
answer, “Ci rimedia in cinghiale” (Give me redress in the matter of the
wild boar). She then came to Rome and appealed to the Pope, who ordered
the gamekeeper to be imprisoned, and the Prince to pay the woman fifteen
crowns a month as long as she lived.

                  *       *       *       *       *

When the Constable de Bourbon’s troops sacked Rome, they carried away
with them a large quantity of papers, among which were several notes
showing where people had buried their money and plate. Many of the
French afterwards returned, and by means of this information found much
hidden property. This circumstance may have given rise to the common
belief of the Italians that the French are magicians.

                  *       *       *       *       *

At one time devout plays representing Paradise, Purgatory, and Hell,
were acted in the theatre of Chaumont, a small town in Champagne. But by
an unfortunate accident Paradise fell into Purgatory, and Purgatory into
Hell, since which no more representations have been given, and the
affair is known as “La Diablerie de Chaumont.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

A Polish Prince having said something impertinent to a lady at Rome, she
answered: “Allez-vous-en; vous êtes un bel enfant.” “Madame,” he
replied, “vous n’êtes ni l’un ni l’autre.” This happened some years ago.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Pope Rezzonico wanted to establish a feast in a little village, on the
canonisation of St. Barbarigo, a relative of his family. As the
villagers did not choose to go to the expense of a new picture, they
stuck a portrait of the new saint with wax over a painting of St.
Charles Borromée. But the candles being lighted and the church growing
warm, the wax melted in the middle of the service, and the temporary
saint tumbled down, leaving St. Charles triumphant. On which some of the
people exclaimed, “A miracle!” and declared that the Pope had wanted to
impose a saint upon them, but the miracle proved that he was not a true
saint.

                  *       *       *       *       *

When Cardinal Cornaro was Governor, a message was brought to him while
attending the Pope at a function, stating that, in a quarrel between his
coachman and another, Prince Borghese had cut to pieces the harness
belonging to the latter. The Pope asked what was the matter, and
Monseigneur Cornaro being taken by surprise, told the whole affair, and
was ordered by his Holiness to confine the Prince to his own house. This
was done; but the accusation was soon proved to be entirely false, and
to have been got up to injure the Governor with the Prince, who only a
few days before had sent him a pair of horses as a present. No apology
was made to the Prince; only Cardinal Giraud was sent to him to say that
Sovereigns might sometimes make mistakes, but their mistakes were not to
be called in question.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Abbess of the monastery of San Cesimato told us, after making many
apologies for fear of scandalising Père Jacquier, who was with us, that
she had dreamt that morning that the three years for her being abbess
had terminated, and that all the nuns came to desire her to continue in
that office. Upon which she was in such a passion that she wished them
all at the devil, and so loud that the whole dormitory heard her. She
was very lively, and said that she took the veil at the age of fifteen,
when she was so thin that everybody thought her in a consumption. She is
now upwards of sixty, and blessed with quite sufficient “en bon point.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The coachman of Monseigneur Gregori, who was about to be made a
Cardinal, wounded his wife in a quarrel, and the poor woman was carried
to an hospital. He insisted upon going in to see her—a thing never
permitted in the part of the building allotted to women. Having a knife
in his hand he tried to get in by force, but one of the people of the
house picked up a big stone and frightened him away, at the same time
calling to the sbirri to take him up. They were afraid, however, to do
so when they heard that he was Monseigneur Gregori’s coachman, until the
directors of the hospital told them that they would be answerable. They
then carried him off to the prison at the Governo. Monseigneur Gregori
sent immediately to the Governor, to say that he was going out and
wanted his coachman, but the Governor returned for answer that he, too,
wanted him.

Count Scutellari being with the Pope, his Holiness, to give more weight
to an assertion, said, “Da galantuomo è vero.” The Count assured his
Holiness that he need not have used so strong an expression, as he was
obliged to believe him on half a word.

                  *       *       *       *       *

When the Governor (Spinelli) was very ill, a physician was sent for from
Naples, who had been recommended as the head of the profession in that
city. He said he wanted a man who was not afraid to deal with the Roman
doctors. When he came they began, as usual, to give him an account of
all the bleedings, &c., with which they had treated their patient. The
Neapolitan, without waiting to hear the end of their story, ran up,
caught Monseigneur Spinelli by the hand, and exclaimed, “Séi vive
ancora!” The physicians, disconcerted at the expression, left the case
in his hands, and the Governor has himself told us that he believes he
owes his life entirely to this man. The Princess of Palestrine went to
see him one day when he was at the worst, and as she was going out his
people asked her what she thought of his state: “Why,” said she, “he
appears to me beyond all hope of recovery; but he is Spinelli, and till
you give him the last blow on the nose, like the cats he will escape.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The learned and excellent Abbate Cunich was a native of Ragusa, and
entered at an early age into the order of Jesuits; after the extinction
of which he was Professor of the Greek language at the Roman College for
a long series of years. His translation of Homer’s Iliad into Latin
verse is esteemed as one of the most faithful, and, at the same time,
one of the finest, versions as to style and purity of language which it
is possible to imagine. He also translated many beautiful Greek epigrams
from the Anthologia with equal success, and composed several himself,
remarkable for their elegance, and chiefly encomiastic. The purity of
mind, sanctity of manners, and innocent cheerfulness which were
conspicuous in the character of Cunich, rendered him universally beloved
and respected. He had warm feelings, and naturally great quickness of
temper; but the deep sense of religion which influenced his life and
behaviour gave him great power of self-government, which was further
strengthened by his unaffected humility and singular moderation. At the
advanced period of life when I knew him, his form and features were
still beautiful, and his imagination as active and poetical as it could
have been at twenty-five. He died, as far as I recollect, in 1796, of a
long and painful illness, which he had concealed and borne with the
greatest patience and resignation, not being confined to his room till
within a very short time of his death. His affections, being by his
profession confined to friendships, were, in their warmth and sincerity,
more like those of ancient than of modern times; and he was so
disinterested that, although he counted amongst his friends many persons
of high rank and considerable influence, he never solicited, or even
wished, for riches or distinctions. He associated only with worthy
characters, and, not having the desire of celebrity, rather withdrew
from the world than encouraged the advances of new acquaintances who
admired his talents. But this retirement from the world in general was
not owing to any dislike of it. He was singularly candid, charitable in
his opinion of others, and really, I believe, imagined that others
possessed the same virtues, or, perhaps, greater than those which his
serenity of mind must have made him conscious of possessing.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Abbé Boscovich was also a native of Ragusa, a small republic in
Dalmatia, on the shores of the Adriatic, celebrated for the industry of
its inhabitants, and for the singularity of its political situation. I
never yet knew a Ragusan who did not possess genius and learning.
Boscovich was a great mathematician, and a man of probity. He had a
remarkable talent for making extempore Latin verses. His epigram on the
planets is deservedly admired, as it scatters flowers on a subject which
did not appear susceptible of them. “As in the order of succession in
their orbits round the Sun, our Earth,” says he, “is between Mars and
Venus, no wonder that love and war govern the world.”

At the extinction of the order of Jesuits, Boscovich took refuge in
France, and was much beloved there. A place was created on purpose for
him, the “Inspection of the Optics for the Marine.” He was intimate with
many of the first families of France, but no sycophant. At an advanced
age he took the resolution of paying a visit to his own country to see
his mother, who was still alive and in the enjoyment of her faculties.
His voluminous works he printed at Bassano, in the Venetian States. He
became childish at last, but fortunately died before the French
Revolution, which would have deprived him of many comforts.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Among the last of the memoranda collected by Miss Knight is one bearing
the initial letters C. S., which purports to describe the characteristic
features of the last three reigns:]

“The reign of George the Third was that of public and private virtue.
The reign of George the Fourth was that of national fame and glory. The
reign of William the Fourth was that of domestic kindness and happiness.
We humbly advise our young Queen to take the first for her model, in
which we trust that she will be rewarded by the two others.”

On this hint Miss Knight composed the following verses, dated July,
1837, and therefore within six months of her death:

             Of George the Third the long and arduous sway,
               The reign of worth and virtue we may name.
             With George the Fourth we see our isle display
               The brilliant scenes of victory and fame.
             Affection’s kind, domestic joys we view
               In our late William’s short, benignant reign.
             O may our Queen her Grandsire’s steps pursue,
               And love and glory as reward obtain!
             Possessing in all British hearts the place
               Her noble ancestors so justly won;
             And may the honours of the Brunswick race
               Resplendent shine coeval with the sun!

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the back of a card, on which Queen Charlotte had copied a short
sacred poem, Miss Knight has written:—“_Copied by the Queen, and given
by her to E. C. K., December 10, 1805. God Almighty grant, through the
mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ, that my sins may be forgiven, and
that His will may be the dearest wish of my heart, with gratitude
(however imperfect) for the blessings He has deigned to bestow on me!_”


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               APPENDIX.

      EXCLUSION OF THE PRINCESS OF WALES PROM THE QUEEN’S DRAWING
                 ROOM—DEATH OF THE PRINCESS CHARLOTTE.




------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               APPENDIX.

                                -------

[THE following is the correspondence relative to the exclusion of the
Princess of Wales from the Queen’s Drawing-room, to which reference is
made at the end of the first and commencement of this volume:]

                 LETTER OF THE PRINCESS OF WALES TO THE
                             PRINCE REGENT.

    “SIR,—I am once more reluctantly compelled to address your Royal
    Highness, and to enclose, for your inspection, copies of a note
    which I have had the honour to receive from the Queen, and of the
    answer which I have thought it my duty to return to her Majesty. It
    would be in vain for me to inquire into the reasons of the alarming
    declaration made by your Royal Highness, that you have taken the
    fixed and unalterable determination never to meet me, upon any
    occasion, either in public or private. Of these, your Royal Highness
    is pleased to state yourself to be the only judge. You will perceive
    by my answer to her Majesty, that I have only been restrained by
    motives of personal consideration towards her Majesty, from
    exercising my right of appearing before her Majesty at the public
    drawing-rooms to be held in the ensuing month.

    “But, Sir, lest it should be by possibility supposed that the words
    of your Royal Highness can convey any insinuation from which I
    shrink, I am bound to demand of your Royal Highness, what
    circumstances can justify the proceedings you have thus thought fit
    to adopt?

    “I owe it to myself, to my daughter, and to the nation, to which I
    am deeply indebted for the vindication of my honour, to remind your
    Royal Highness of what you know: that after open persecution and
    mysterious inquiries, upon undefined charges, the malice of my
    enemies fell entirely upon themselves; and that I was restored by
    the King, with the advice of his Ministers, to the full enjoyment of
    my rank in his court, upon my complete acquittal. Since his
    Majesty’s lamented illness, I have demanded, in the face of
    Parliament and the country, to be proved guilty or to be treated as
    innocent. I have been declared innocent; I will not submit to be
    treated as guilty.

    “Sir, your Royal Highness may possibly refuse to read this letter.
    But the world must know that I have written it: and they will see my
    real motives for foregoing, in this instance, the rights of my rank.
    Occasions, however, may arise (one, I trust, is far distant) when I
    must appear in public, and your Royal Highness must be present also.
    Can your Royal Highness have contemplated the full extent of your
    declaration? Has your Royal Highness forgotten the approaching
    marriage of our daughter, and the possibility of our coronation?

    “I waive my rights in a case where I am not absolutely bound to
    assert them, in order to relieve the Queen, as far as I can, from
    the painful situation in which she is placed by your Royal Highness;
    not from any consciousness of blame, not from any doubt of the
    existence of those rights, or of my own worthiness to enjoy them.

    “Sir, the time you have selected for this proceeding is calculated
    to make it peculiarly galling. Many illustrious strangers are
    already arrived in England; among others, as I am informed, the
    illustrious heir of the House of Orange, who has announced himself
    to me as my future son-in-law. From their society I am unjustly
    excluded. Others are expected of rank equal to your own, to rejoice
    with your Royal Highness in the peace of Europe. My daughter will,
    for the first time, appear in the splendour and publicity becoming
    the approaching nuptials of the presumptive Heiress of this Empire.
    This season your Royal Highness has chosen for treating me with
    fresh and unprovoked indignity: and of all his Majesty’s subjects, I
    alone am prevented by your Royal Highness from appearing in my place
    to partake of the general joy, and am deprived of the indulgence in
    those feelings of pride and affection permitted to every mother but
    me.

            “I am, Sir,

                “Your Royal Highness’s

                    “Faithful wife,

                        “CAROLINE P.”

    “CONNAUGHT HOUSE, MAY 26, 1814.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

                            (_Enclosures._)

                  THE QUEEN TO THE PRINCESS OF WALES.

                                          “Windsor Castle, May 23, 1814.

    “The Queen considers it to be her duty to lose no time in
    acquainting the Princess of Wales, that she has received a
    communication from her son, the Prince Regent, in which he states,
    that her Majesty’s intention of holding two drawing-rooms in the
    ensuing month having been notified to the public, he must declare
    that he considers that his own presence at her court cannot be
    dispensed with; and that he desires it may be distinctly understood,
    for reasons of which he alone can be the judge, to be his fixed and
    unalterable determination not to meet the Princess of Wales upon any
    occasion, either in public or private.

    “The Queen is thus placed under the painful necessity of intimating
    to the Princess of Wales the impossibility of her Majesty’s
    receiving her Royal Highness at her drawing-rooms.

                                                          “CHARLOTTE R.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

             ANSWER OF THE PRINCESS OF WALES TO THE QUEEN.

    “MADAM,—I have received the letter which your Majesty has done me
    the honour to address to me, prohibiting my appearance at the public
    drawing-rooms which will be held by your Majesty in the ensuing
    month, with great surprise and regret.

    “I will not presume to discuss with your Majesty topics which must
    be as painful to your Majesty as to myself.

    “Your Majesty is well acquainted with the affectionate regard with
    which the King was so kind as to honour me up to the period of his
    Majesty’s indisposition, which no one of his Majesty’s subjects has
    so much cause to lament as myself: and that his Majesty was
    graciously pleased to bestow upon me the most unequivocal and
    gratifying proof of his attachment and approbation, by his public
    reception of me at his court at a season of severe and unmerited
    affliction, when his protection was most necessary to me. There I
    have since uninterruptedly paid my respects to your Majesty. I am
    now without appeal or protection. But I cannot so far forget my duty
    to the King, and to myself, as to surrender my right to appear at
    any public drawing-room to be held by your Majesty.

    “That I may not, however, add to the difficulty and uneasiness of
    your Majesty’s situation, I yield in the present instance to the
    will of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent, announced to me by
    your Majesty, and shall not present myself at the drawing-rooms of
    the next month.

    “It would be presumptuous in me to attempt to inquire of your
    Majesty the reasons of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent for this
    harsh proceeding, of which his Royal Highness can alone be the
    judge. I am unconscious of offence; and in that reflection I must
    endeavour to find consolation for all the mortifications I
    experience; even for this, the last, the most unexpected, and the
    most severe; the prohibition given to me alone, to appear before
    your Majesty, to offer my congratulations upon the happy termination
    of those calamities with which Europe has been so long afflicted, in
    the presence of the illustrious personages who will in all
    probability be assembled at your Majesty’s court, with whom I am so
    closely connected by birth and marriage.

    “I beseech your Majesty to do me an act of justice, to which, in the
    present circumstances, your Majesty is the only person competent, by
    acquainting those illustrious strangers with the motives of personal
    consideration towards your Majesty which alone induce me to abstain
    from the exercise of my right to appear before your Majesty: and
    that I do now, as I have done at all times, defy the malice of my
    enemies to fix upon me the shadow of any one imputation which could
    render me unworthy of their society or regard.

    “Your Majesty will, I am sure, not be displeased that I should
    relieve myself from a suspicion of disrespect towards your Majesty,
    by making public the cause of my absence from court at a time when
    the duties of my station would otherwise peculiarly demand my
    attendance.

        “I have the honour to be,

            “Your Majesty’s most obedient

                “Daughter-in-law and servant,

                    “P. CAROLINE.

    “Connaught House, May 24, 1814.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

                  THE QUEEN TO THE PRINCESS OF WALES.

                                          “Windsor Castle, May 25, 1814.

    “The Queen has received, this afternoon, the Princess of Wales’s
    letter of yesterday, in reply to the communication which she was
    desired by the Prince Regent to make to her; and she is sensible of
    the disposition expressed by her Royal Highness, not to discuss with
    her topics which must be painful to both.

    “The Queen considers it incumbent upon her to send a copy of the
    Princess of Wales’s letter to the Prince Regent; and her Majesty
    could have felt no hesitation in communicating to the illustrious
    strangers who may possibly be present at her court, the
    circumstances which will prevent the Princess of Wales from
    appearing there, if her Royal Highness had not rendered a compliance
    with her wish to this effect unnecessary, by intimating her
    intention of making public the cause of her absence.

                                                          “CHARLOTTE R.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

           THE ANSWER OF THE PRINCESS OF WALES TO THE QUEEN.

    “The Princess of Wales has the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
    a note from the Queen, dated yesterday; and begs permission to
    return her best thanks to her Majesty, for her gracious
    condescension in the willingness expressed by her Majesty to have
    communicated to the illustrious strangers, who will in all
    probability be present at her Majesty’s court, the reasons which
    have induced her Royal Highness not to be present.

    “Such communication, as it appears to her Royal Highness, cannot be
    the less necessary on account of any publicity which it may be in
    the power of her Royal Highness to give to her motives; and the
    Princess of Wales, therefore, entreats the active good offices of
    her Majesty, upon an occasion wherein the Princess of Wales feels it
    so essential to her that she should not be misunderstood.

                                                           “CAROLINE, P.

    “Connaught Place, May 26.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

                    THE QUEEN TO THE PRINCESS OF WALES.

        “The Queen cannot omit to acknowledge the receipt of the
        Princess of Wales’s note, of yesterday, although it does not
        appear to her Majesty to require any other reply than that
        conveyed to her Royal Highness’s preceding letter.

                                                         “CHARLOTTE, R.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

                      DEATH OF THE PRINCESS CHARLOTTE.

    [The following details of the Princess’s death are taken from a
    letter, addressed by Mr. H. F. Cooke to Mr. Thomas Raikes (under
    date November 6, 1817), and published in the interesting volume
    entitled “Correspondence of Thomas Raikes with the Duke of
    Wellington and other Distinguished Contemporaries.”]

        “The Princess Charlotte’s death has caused a general gloom
        throughout the country. The particulars of this truly melancholy
        event will be made known to you through the papers, with all the
        accuracy of official report.

        “There are some few circumstances as attending the death of this
        interesting woman that may not find their way abroad; for
        example, the courage with which she suffered, and the
        resignation which she displayed in death.

        “The faculty of mind never abandoned her. She asked, about an
        hour previous to death, whether there was any danger: the
        difficulty of breathing from about that time prevented her
        speaking much. When Baillie and Croft administered brandy, hot
        wine, sal-volatile, &c., she said, ‘You make me drunk. Pray
        leave me quiet. I find it affects my head.’ And shortly after
        this, raising herself in the bed, she heaved a deep sigh, fell
        back, and expired.

        “The act of dying was not painful. There certainly must have
        been spasm, but I have not heard that it was at the heart.
        Neither do I believe the family conceived that she was in
        danger, even an hour before she died. It is a blow which the
        nation really appears to feel acutely, as much as it is possible
        to suppose the fate of any one not materially connected with one
        could be felt.

        “The Regent is terribly shook by this blow; so unexpected that
        he was completely overset when he was told of it.

        “He had left Sudbourn upon hearing of the protracted labour, but
        was in London informed that the child was dead and she
        remarkably well.”


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               FOOTNOTES.


-----

Footnote 1:

  “Aware of this unnatural rebellion, the Royal parent, as might be
  expected, became anxious to ascertain the description of persons by
  whom his daughter was immediately surrounded, and by means of one of
  the most pious and virtuous characters of the land, it was soon
  discovered that many of her associates were persons possessing
  pernicious sentiments alike hostile to the peace of the daughter, the
  father, and the country. Under these circumstances there was but one
  safe or advisable course to pursue; the determination was prompt, and
  the whole of the obnoxious associates were dismissed by order of the
  Regent from Warwick House.”—_Morning Post_, July 14, 1814.

Footnote 2:

  “The Princess Charlotte came to town on Saturday, attended by her
  ladies-in-waiting, in the Prince Regent’s open carriage and four,
  with three of the Prince Regent’s footmen as outriders, to visit the
  Princess of Wales at Connaught House, and after dinner, her Royal
  Highness returned to Cranbourne Lodge. This visit was to take leave
  previous to the Princess of Wales leaving town for Worthing, where
  her Royal Highness has taken a house. It is said that the Princess
  of Wales does not return to London from thence, but proceeds from
  that place to leave England for a short time to visit her native
  country. The Princess Charlotte’s visit to Connaught House was
  occasioned by a message of the Princess of Wales to the Minister,
  stating that she intended to go to Cranbourne Lodge to see her
  daughter, and expected to be admitted. The answer was, that the
  Princess Charlotte would be allowed to come to Connaught House on
  Saturday. Miss Mercer was allowed to go to Cranbourne Lodge to visit
  the Princess Charlotte on Sunday, and to remain with her Royal
  Highness till to-morrow.”—_Morning Chronicle_, July 26, 1814.

  “Sompting Abbey, Sussex. July 29, 1814.... I saw Princess Charlotte on
  Saturday, two days before I set out; she seems much more calm and
  resigned to her prison at Cranbourne Lodge than I expected. She is to
  go afterwards to the sea-side. Warwick House is to be demolished, and
  a new wing built to Carlton House; and the Regent is to remove to the
  Duke of Cumberland’s apartments in St. James’s Palace.”—_Extract of
  Letter from Princess of Wales, given in Lady Campbell’s Diary_, vol.
  i.

Footnote 3:

  “The Princess of Wales arrived at her house near Worthing on Tuesday
  night, and next evening she walked to Worthing, accompanied by her
  lady-in-waiting and attendants. Chairs were immediately placed on the
  beach, where her Royal Highness sat two hours. The moonbeams danced on
  the waves, and the pleasure-boats glided at her feet, forming a most
  delightful scene. The company is now select and numerous, and the
  packet which regularly sails to and from Dieppe is a great
  convenience, as it enables parties to drink champagne at Worthing in
  the evening, and old port on the French coast the next
  morning.”—_Morning Chronicle_, August 3, 1814.

Footnote 4:

  “We understand that Princess Charlotte is going this day to Cranbourne
  Lodge, from whence, we trust, she will be permitted to repair to the
  sea-coast, bathing having been recommended by three eminent
  professional men as indispensably necessary for her general health, as
  well as for a local affection in the knee. Health and peace be with
  her!”—_Morning Chronicle_, August 18, 1814.

Footnote 5:

  “The removal of the Princess Charlotte from Cranbourne Lodge to the
  King’s house at Weymouth is expected to take place this day or
  to-morrow. Her Royal Highness will be accompanied by the Countesses of
  Ilchester and Rosslyn, the Misses Coutts (Coates), Mrs. Campbell,
  General Garth, Major Price,” &c.—_Morning Chronicle_, August 24.

  The names of General Garth and Major Price will be familiar to the
  readers of Madame D’Arblay’s Diary, with whom the Major was an
  especial favourite.

Footnote 6:

  The fourth Viscount Ashbrook. Lady Ashbrook, his second wife, was
  sister of the late Lord Metcalfe, and daughter of Sir Theophilus
  Metcalfe, Bart.

Footnote 7:

  The following are the letters to which Miss Knight refers:—

      “MY DEAREST MADAM,—To suffer the 7th January to pass entirely
      without notice is a self-denial of which I do not feel myself
      capable, although I have not ventured to ask permission for paying
      my personal respects.

      “That every blessing may attend your Royal Highness, in this and
      many succeeding years, is the constant, and will be among the
      latest, prayers of

              “My dearest madam,

                  “Your Royal Highness’s

              “Most dutifully attached servant.”

                   “To H.R.H. the Princess Charlotte.”

      “MY DEAR MADAM,—The liberty I take in enclosing a letter for
      Princess Charlotte, merely to offer my dutiful respects, will, I
      trust, be mitigated by the assurance that I leave it entirely to
      the discretion of your Royal Highness whether it should be given
      or not.

      “Nothing can ever alter the sentiments of respectful attachment
      with which I have the honour to be,

              “My dear madam,

                  “Your Royal Highness’s

      “Most obliged and obedient servant.

      “To H.R.H. the Princess Mary.”

Footnote 8:

  “Madame de Lieven is a Livonian by birth, and is remarkable for the
  distinction of her appearance as well as for her general talents. She
  is the only foreigner who was ever made a patroness of Almack’s, into
  the tracasseries of which establishment she entered very cordially,
  and as her manner at times is tinctured with a certain degree of
  hauteur, she has not failed to make many enemies. Madame de Lieven is,
  however, in every sense of the word, a _très grande dame_, and has
  formed friendships and intimacies with the highest persons of all
  parties in England.”—_Raikes’s Journal_, vol. i.

Footnote 9:

  See extract in Appendix from the Duke of Buckingham’s “Memoirs of the
  Regency.”

Footnote 10:

  March 9th, but it was subsequently postponed to the 13th, on which
  occasion Miss Knight was present, and her dress is thus described in
  the _Morning Post_ of the following day:—“A petticoat of white satin
  with draperies of peach-blossom silver gauze, most tastefully disposed
  with silver trimming, which formed a lacing between each to display
  the petticoat underneath, and ornamented with silver cords and
  tassels. Robe to correspond, trimmed with point lace. Head-dress,
  feathers, and diamonds.”

Footnote 11:

  Mr. Robinson’s bill to prohibit the importation of corn, except for
  bonding purposes, until the average price of wheat had reached 80_s._
  a quarter.

Footnote 12:

  Probably the Duke of Cumberland, whose marriage with the Dowager
  Princess of Salms was several times announced in the _Morning
  Chronicle_—and it did ultimately take place.

Footnote 13:

  “The Princess of Wales has asked for a ship of war to convey her home
  to Great Britain from Naples, and has been informed that no vessel
  could be conveniently spared at this time from the Mediterranean
  station to accommodate her Royal Highness.”—_Morning Chronicle_,
  February 25.

Footnote 14:

  Prince Castelcicala died at Paris of cholera in 1832, at which time he
  was Neapolitan Ambassador at the Court of France. He was in the
  eightieth year of his age, and “had long been known,” pleasantly
  observes Mr. Raikes, “for his self-indulgent mode of life.”

Footnote 15:

  On the occasion of the chairing of Mr. Barclay, who was compelled to
  take refuge in the Horns Tavern, Kennington. The tumult arose from a
  misapprehension with respect to Mr. Barclay’s vote on the Corn-law
  Question.

Footnote 16:

  Widow of Mr. Perceval, the Prime Minister, assassinated by Bellingham,
  May 11, 1812.

Footnote 17:

  It was said, because the rooms were being gilded and redecorated.

Footnote 18:

  “The new favourite grand ballet composed by Monsieur A. Vestris,
  entitled, ‘Le Prince Troubadour, ou la Double Epreuve.’ The music by
  F. Venua.”—The plot was taken from the opera of “Joconde,” and the
  principal performers were the two Vestrises, M. Baptiste, Mesdames
  Leon and Del Caro, and Mademoiselle Mélanie. It was highly praised in
  the morning papers.

Footnote 19:

  Son and daughter of the Countess Charleville, by her first husband,
  James Tisdall, Esq.

Footnote 20:

  Lord Ellenborough’s, in Saint James’s-square; Lord Eldon’s, in
  Bedford-square; Mr. Robinson’s, in Burlington-street; Lord Darnley’s,
  in Berkeley-square; Mr. Yorke’s, in Bruton-street.

Footnote 21:

  Mr. Robinson, as proposer of the Corn Regulations, was especially
  obnoxious to the mob. The railings in front of his house were torn up,
  the windows and parlour shutters demolished, and the street door split
  open. Some soldiers who were in the house then fired into the street
  at random, and a man fell shot through the head. From the buttons on
  his coat it was conjectured that he was a naval officer; he proved to
  be a midshipman, named Edward Vyse—several other persons being
  wounded.

Footnote 22:

  In addition to the household troops, the 10th Dragoons occupied the
  King’s Mews, the 16th Dragoons the Queen’s Riding-house, the 5th
  Dragoon Guards were at Romford, the 7th Hussars at Putney, the 18th in
  Lambeth, the 5th Foot at Knightsbridge, and the South Lincoln Militia
  in the Tower.

Footnote 23:

  The attack on New Orleans on the 8th January, when the British were
  repulsed, with the loss of 2454 men, killed, wounded, and made
  prisoners.

Footnote 24:

  “March 8.—They next proceeded to Mr. Ponsonby’s house, No. 19, in
  Curzon-street, May-Fair, with their numbers increasing on their way.
  On their arrival at Mr. Ponsonby’s, they presented a very formidable
  force. They instantly commenced a furious attack upon the house,
  demolished the windows, and broke the iron palisades in front. During
  this, some firing began from the inside of the house, through the
  door, while the mob were endeavouring to break it open. The door is
  much injured by the bullets which were fired through it, but we have
  not heard that any person was hurt. The house of Mr. Quentin Dick,
  next door to Mr. Ponsonby’s, is also considerably injured from the
  misdirection of the stone-throwers. In a few minutes the cavalry made
  their appearance, and the populace immediately dispersed in various
  directions.”—_Annual Register_, 1814, p. 23.

Footnote 25:

  The French Ambassador, M. de la Châtre, in a letter to the editor of
  the _Anti-Gallican_, denied that M. Rayneval was ever private
  secretary to Caulincourt. He was merely chargé d’affaires at St.
  Petersburg until the arrival of the latter. The editor, Mr. Goldsmith,
  rejoined that, however that might be, M. Rayneval was with Caulincourt
  at Châtillon, and remained with him until Napoleon’s abdication,
  adding, “in fact, it was M. Rayneval who drew up the treaty of
  Fontainebleau.”

Footnote 26:

  This “man” was the celebrated pianist Frederick Kalkbrenner, son of
  the equally well-known composer, Christian Kalkbrenner. Frederick
  Kalkbrenner visited London for the first time in 1814, and excited the
  greatest enthusiasm, eclipsing even the long-established reputation of
  Cramer. He resided in England ten years, and made a very handsome
  fortune.

Footnote 27:

  The first notice of this event was received by Mr. Rothschild, who
  immediately sold out stock to the amount of 600,000_l._ before the
  news was generally known.

Footnote 28:

  The Chancellor, Lord Eldon, lived at No. 6, which was attacked by the
  mob on the 6th, the iron railings torn up, and every pane of glass and
  much furniture broken and destroyed. The windows being broken, it was
  facetiously remarked that his Lordship at last kept open house. The
  mob was kept at bay by a party of soldiers sent from the British
  Museum, until a troop of the Horse Guards arrived and cleared the
  square.

Footnote 29:

  “Napoleon Bonaparte is declared a traitor and a rebel for having
  appeared with arms in his hands in the Department of the Var.”—_Art.
  IV. of the Ordonnance du Roi._

Footnote 30:

  Richard II., Mr. Kean; John of Gaunt, Mr. Pope; Bolingbroke, Mr.
  Elliston; Duke of Norfolk, Mr. Rae; the Queen, Mrs. Bartley.

Footnote 31:

  “‘Messieurs,’ said the King, ‘you see me suffering, but do not deceive
  yourselves: it is not disquietude, but gout which causes it. Assure
  your Sovereigns, with respect to what is passing in France, that the
  repose of Europe will be no more disturbed than that of
  France.’”—_Morning Chronicle_, March 13, 1815.

Footnote 32:

  General Clarke, Duc de Feltre, formerly war minister under the
  Emperor.

Footnote 33:

  “Four persons literally carried his Lordship out of the House, he,
  however, kicking and struggling somewhat violently.”—_Morning
  Chronicle_, March 22, 1815.

Footnote 34:

  Louis XVIII. left Paris at 8 P.M. of the 19th, and slept at Abbeville
  on the 20th. Napoleon entered Paris at 9 P.M. on the 20th.

Footnote 35:

  This was not the case. Lord Fitzroy Somerset left Paris with the King.

Footnote 36:

  Madame Adelaide.

Footnote 37:

  Colonel the Baron Labadayse, who reported that six thousand National
  Guards and four thousand troops of the line had sworn to remain
  faithful, but their defection took place a few days later.

Footnote 38:

  “G. P. R.—The Prince Regent, acting in the name and on the behalf of
  his Majesty, thinks it right to inform the House of Lords, that the
  events which have recently occurred in France, in direct contravention
  of the engagements concluded with the allied powers, at Paris, in the
  month of April last, and which threaten consequences highly dangerous
  to the tranquillity and independence of Europe, have induced his Royal
  Highness to give directions for the augmentation of his Majesty’s land
  and sea forces.

  “The Prince Regent has likewise deemed it incumbent upon him to lose
  no time in entering into communications with his Majesty’s allies, for
  the purpose of forming such a concert as may most effectually provide
  for the general and permanent security of Europe.

  “And his Royal Highness confidently relies on the support of the House
  of Lords in all measures which may be necessary for the accomplishment
  of this important object.”

Footnote 39:

  General Clausel entered Bordeaux on the 2nd April, the Duchess having
  embarked at Pouillac on board an English frigate, the _Wanderer_, on
  the previous day, and landed at Plymouth on the 19th.

Footnote 40:

  There were two armed yachts in attendance on the Princess Charlotte at
  Weymouth, the _Royal Charlotte_ and the _Royal Sovereign_.

Footnote 41:

  “The lady has rather produced a dramatic poem than a regular drama.
  The versification is sweet and harmonious, the sentiments just and
  impressive, the images poetical, and, though not recommended by their
  actual novelty, were rendered so by their dress and elegance. It was a
  poem, then, which will be _read_ with delight, but which wanted
  situation, incident, and passion to give it dramatic effect on the
  stage.”—_Morning Chronicle_, April 24, 1815.

  Mrs. Wilmot, the authoress of “Ina,” was sister of Lady Asgill, and,
  therefore, first cousin of Mrs. Sheridan.

Footnote 42:

  Lord Tullamore, born April 28, 1801, afterwards second Earl of
  Charleville.

Footnote 43:

  Born King of Rome, died Duke de Reichstadt, a colonel in the Austrian
  service.

Footnote 44:

  Coriolanus, Mr. Kemble; Sicinius, Mr. Barrymore; Brutus, Mr. Murray;
  Volumnia, Mrs. Renaud.

Footnote 45:

  “Covent Garden Theatre. The beautiful masque of ‘Comus’ was revived
  last night (April 28) at this theatre with great splendour. All the
  music of Handel and Arne was retained, with some additions by Bishop.
  Miss Stephens sung the Echo song with the most fascinating effect.
  Mrs. Liston was encored in the fine song, “By dimpled brook.” Mrs.
  Faucit in The Lady, and Mr. Abbot in the Elder Brother, gave strong
  effect to the beautiful poetry, and Mr. Conway was, at least, a very
  grand figure in Comus. It was received throughout with rapturous
  applause.”—_Morning Chronicle_, April 29.

Footnote 46:

  The present Countess of Essex.

Footnote 47:

  “We have great pleasure in announcing that the marriage is settled
  between the Duke of Devonshire and Miss Mercer, daughter of Lord
  Keith. It is to take place next week.”—_Morning Chronicle_, May 11,
  1815.

Footnote 48:

  “We are desired to contradict, from authority, the report of the
  Honourable Miss Mercer Elphinstone’s marriage with the Duke of
  Devonshire.”—_Ibid._, May 12.

Footnote 49:

  “Mr. Naldi’s last concert for the season was given at the superb
  mansion of Mrs. Maitland, in Grosvenor-place, on Monday last. The
  numerous suite of rooms were crowded, and the splendours of the ladies
  made it a grand coup d’œil. The concert was chiefly vocal, there being
  only two instrumental pieces. Mr. Naldi had the assistance of Mrs.
  Dickons, Mrs. Salmon, Miss Mortimer, Miss Griglietti, Mr. Braham, Mr.
  Ledesma, and other artists. Miss Mortimer sang a duet, by Zingarelli,
  with Mr. Ledesma, and an aria by Meyer. In these she displayed a
  highly cultivated taste and extensive power of voice. Her musical
  education has evidently been adapted to the theatre rather than to the
  orchestra, as was manifested in the theatrical air by Meyer, which
  demanded considerable execution, and in which, therefore, we were able
  to distinguish the character and style of this native songster, who,
  for ten years past, has performed in all the principal theatres of
  Italy. She will be a great acquisition to the British stage.”—_Morning
  Chronicle_, May 25, 1815.

Footnote 50:

  Fifteen thousand stand of arms taken over by M. Larochejaquelin.

Footnote 51:

  “The Duke de Gallo surrendered two sail of the line, and the whole
  arsenal of Naples, by capitulation, to Captain Campbell, of the
  _Tremendous_, on his threatening to bombard the city.”—_London
  Gazette_, June 5.

Footnote 52:

  “We hear the Duke of Cumberland has signified his intention of coming
  to England, for a very short time, after his marriage, but that the
  Duchess was not expected to accompany him on the present
  occasion.”—_Morning Chronicle_, June 10.

  His Royal Highness arrived in London on the 18th, and alone.

Footnote 53:

  The Duke of Cumberland married a daughter of the reigning Duke of
  Mecklenburg Strelitz, niece of Queen Charlotte, and widow of the
  Prince Salms Brauenfels. The marriage was first solemnised at Berlin,
  but owing to some informality the ceremony was repeated at Carlton
  House on the 29th August, in a very private manner, the old Queen
  refusing to be present.

Footnote 54:

  The news of the occupation of Paris was announced by Mr. Elliston on
  the 6th at the King’s Theatre, where a mixed performance was being
  given for the benefit of the widows and orphans of those who fell at
  Waterloo. In answer to a question, he said he had it in command from
  Carlton House to announce the tidings, which were fully given in the
  morning papers of the 7th.

Footnote 55:

  He was found dead in his dressing-room, about 10 A.M., July 6.

Footnote 56:

  Daughter of Count Dillon, guillotined at Paris in 1794 for his
  adherence to the Bourbons. Her mother was the Countess Latouche, of
  Martinique.

Footnote 57:

  Her Royal Highness left London on the 26th July in a carriage and
  four, attended by Lady Ilchester and Colonel Addenbroke, Dr. Short,
  and Mrs. Campbell.

Footnote 58:

  Owing to an affection of the eyes, Miss Knight discontinued her
  journal until the commencement of the ensuing year.

Footnote 59:

  “The morn (of January 7) was ushered in by the ringing of bells, and
  preparations were making in the early part of the day for a general
  illumination in the evening, in compliment to the Princess Charlotte,
  whose natal day it was; but a desire was expressed that this mark of
  respect and loyalty from the town might be dispensed with.”—_Morning
  Post_, January 10, 1816.

  There was a grand ball at the Pavilion, attended by “all the families
  of rank and fashion” at Brighton.

Footnote 60:

  Mr. Ward, afterwards Lord Dudley, was a great favourite with the
  Princess of Wales. “How melancholy are all the recollections attached
  to his name! A person endowed with such supremacy of talent and
  situation, and yet so blasted by an invisible hand, that none of the
  former availed to his happiness. No one, it is said (either for his
  own sake, or, alas! more probably, for his brilliant position in
  life), was ever more courted by the fair sex, in despite of a very
  plain exterior and coarseness of manner. He was accounted one of the
  most agreeable and seductive of men. The beautiful Mrs. B. was one of
  those reported to have been not insensible to his attentions. Her
  melancholy death was, it is said, the actual cause of finally
  confirming his mental derangement.”—_Lady C. Campbell’s Diary_, vol.
  ii. p. 117.

Footnote 61:

  Major-General Sir Robert Thomas Wilson, Michael Bruce, Esq., and
  Captain John Hely Hutchinson, were tried before the Court of Assize
  for the Department of the Seine, found guilty of being accessory to
  the concealment and escape of General Lavalette, and sentenced to
  three months’ imprisonment. The trial took place on the 22nd of April.
  In the first instance, they were accused of plotting against the
  political system of Europe in general, and the French monarchy in
  particular, but these charges were subsequently withdrawn.

Footnote 62:

  A message was sent from the Prince Regent to each House of Parliament
  on the 14th of March, announcing the forthcoming marriage of his
  daughter, Princess Charlotte Augusta, with his Serene Highness Leopold
  George Frederick Prince of Coburg of Saalfeld. The Commons granted the
  illustrious pair the annual sum of 60,000_l._, of which 10,000_l._
  were for the exclusive use of the Princess. They also voted the sums
  of 40,000_l._ to purchase furniture, plate, equipages, &c., 10,000_l._
  for the Princess’s dresses, and 10,000_l._ for jewels.

Footnote 63:

  “Notwithstanding some disadvantages, the Princess (Charlotte) had
  grown up to womanhood with many attractions, both mental and personal.
  Her Royal Highness possessed, also, a nature susceptible of every
  generous impression; unsuspicious and trusting, she readily became the
  dupe of persons who sought for their own objects to influence her
  through her sympathies, but when the influence was removed, the
  natural good sense of the Princess suggested a line of conduct
  becoming her sex and position. During the period when the society of
  her mother was least restricted, there is nothing to prove that her
  Royal Highness testified for it a very decided partiality; and it was
  scarcely possible for her to have been a frequent visitor at
  Blackheath and Kensington, without obtaining a knowledge that must
  have circumscribed her affection. Her disposition was extremely
  amiable, notwithstanding an impulsiveness that, under peculiar
  provocation, may have led her on one or two occasions into error; a
  pleasing proof of which was exhibited in her conduct to Lord Eldon,
  after he had brought her home, subsequently to her elopement from
  Warwick House. In her communications with, or observations on her
  mother, after the latter had left England, there are quite sufficient
  evidences of filial interest, tempered with a reserve naturally
  arising out of a sense of her objectionable conduct.”—_Duke of
  Buckingham’s Memoirs of the Court of the Regency_, vol. ii. p. 156.

Footnote 64:

  The Princess Charlotte in 1811. “She is grown excessively, and has all
  the fulness of a person of five-and-twenty. She is neither graceful
  nor elegant; yet she has a peculiar air _et tous les prestiges de la
  royauté et du pouvoir_. The Princess is above the middle height,
  extremely spread for her age; her bosom full, but finely shaped; her
  shoulders large, and her whole person voluptuous, but of a nature to
  become soon spoiled; and without much care and exercise, she will
  shortly lose all beauty in fat and clumsiness. Her skin is white, but
  not a transparent white. There is little or no shade in her face, but
  her features are very fine. Their expression, like that of her general
  demeanour, is noble. Her feet are rather small, and her hands and arms
  are finely moulded. She has a hesitation in her speech amounting
  almost to a stammer—an additional proof, if any were wanting, of her
  being her father’s own child; but in everything she is his very image.
  Her voice is flexible, and its tones dulcet, except when she laughs,
  then it becomes too loud, but is never unmusical. She seems to wish to
  be admired more as a lovely woman than as a Queen. Yet she has
  quickness both of penetration and fancy, and would fain reign
  despotically, or I am much mistaken. I fear she is capricious,
  self-willed, and obstinate. I think she is kind-hearted, clever, and
  enthusiastic. Her faults have evidently never been checked, nor her
  virtues fostered.”—_Lady C. Campbell’s Diary_, vol. i. p. 65.

Footnote 65:

  “I received a visit from Miss Knight. Her presence recalled Kensington
  and the poor Princess to my mind. She conversed with sense and
  kindliness on these topics, but her exceeding prudence always
  restrains the expression of her feelings, and she appeared averse to
  dwelling on the subject. The only remark she made which struck me as
  singular was that, in speaking of the King’s illness and probable
  decease, she said she conceived it would be a fortunate event for the
  country. Miss Knight has a very refined mind, and takes delight in
  every subject connected with literature and the arts. She is
  exceedingly well read, and has an excellent judgment in these
  matters.... I alluded once to the poor Princess Charlotte’s death, but
  Miss Knight only replied, ‘Ah, that was a melancholy event!’ and
  passed on to other subjects. She did not impress me with the idea of
  lamenting the Princess so much as I should have supposed she would
  have done. But perhaps she may, in reality, mourn her melancholy fate,
  and that she only forbears speaking of her lest she should say too
  much. Certainly Miss Knight was very ill-used by the Queen and the
  Regent, and I do not think Princess Charlotte liked, although she
  esteemed her. Miss Knight was not sufficiently gay, or of a style of
  character suited to her Royal Highness.”—_Lady C. Campbell’s Diary_,
  vol. iii. p. 7.

Footnote 66:

  Louis Philippe, son of Philippe l’Egalité, Duke of Orleans: afterwards
  King of the French.

Footnote 67:

  George Hammond, Esq., and David R. Morier, Esq., his Majesty’s
  Consul-General in France, were gazetted December 20, 1815, as his
  Majesty’s Commissioners of Arbitration.

Footnote 68:

  Probably wife of M. de Fontanes, who translated into French Pope’s
  “Essay on Man.” By the Emperor he was created Count of the Empire,
  Commandant of the Legion of Honour, and Grand Master of the Imperial
  University; and by Louis XVIII. he was subsequently created Peer of
  France and Officer of the Legion of Honour.

Footnote 69:

  Lady Morgan’s “chef d’un magasin de blanchissage” was willing to
  “pardon the King much for giving ‘la nation une princesse blanche
  comme la neige.’”—_Lady Morgan’s France in 1816_, vol. i. p. 105.

Footnote 70:

  The Duke of Wellington occupied the Hôtel de la Regnière. “It was in
  this hotel that his Grace gave a splendid ball, on the occasion of the
  marriage of the Duc de Berri, which, from the circumstance of all the
  guests coming fresh from the _grand couvert_ at the Tuileries in their
  splendid court dresses, together with the illuminations of the hotel
  and gardens in honour of the event, produced an effect of brilliancy
  and magnificence to which description can do no possible justice....
  It was curious to see in this congress of beauty and fashion, to which
  so many countries lent some of their lovely representatives, the
  belles of Berlin, Petersburg, Rome, London, Paris, Edinburgh, and
  Dublin, all assembled under the same roof; Bonapartist generals
  waltzing in close embrace with pretty _royalistes enragées_, and
  revolutionary senators linked in a _chaîne-entière_ with _ultra_
  partners, formed the best illustration of the ‘Holy Alliance’ that
  could possibly be given.”—_Lady Morgan’s France in 1816_, vol. ii. p.
  81.

Footnote 71:

  “The arrangements of this comparatively small theatre combine all that
  is chaste, elegant, light, and splendid in architecture and
  decoration. Illuminated with its thousand lights reflected from their
  crystal branches, it appears some fairy palace of Parian marble and
  burnished gold, at once noble and simple, magnificent and tasteful. To
  this splendid theatre no one was admitted who had not been presented
  at Court, and received a special invitation through the ‘premier
  gentilhomme de la chambre,’ or through their own ambassador. Every one
  appeared in full court dress, and the boxes, or rather the gallery
  which was round the theatre, is so constructed that every individual
  is distinctly seen. The King and the Royal Family occupy a centre box
  on one side; the ministers and ambassadors occupied a box on the
  left-hand of the King, the French Duchesses on the right, for the
  women do not mingle with the men under the present régime in the Court
  of the most gallant country in the world. The ‘parterre’ was
  exclusively occupied by the male part of the audience,” &c. &c.—_Lady
  Morgan’s France in 1816_, vol. i. p. 221.

Footnote 72:

  And not without reason, as the following extracts will show. It must
  be remembered, too, that the Duke of Wellington and many of the
  Waterloo heroes were in the house by special invitation:

            “Je prévois que bientôt cette guerre fatale,
            Ces troubles intestins de la maison royale,
            Ces tristes factions cèderont au danger
            D’abandonner la France au fils de l’étranger.
            Je vois que de l’Anglais la race est peu chérie,
            Que leur joug est pesant! qu’on n’aime leur patrie.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                 ... n’acceptera pour maître,
           L’allié des Anglais, quelque grand qu’il puisse être.

                  *       *       *       *       *

           ... Je ne veux pas que l’Anglais en ces lieux,
         Protecteur insolent, commande sous mes yeux;
         Les Anglais avec moi pourraient mal s’accorder,
         Jusqu’au dernier moment je veux seul commander,” &c. &c.

Footnote 73:

  Then residing at Camelford House.

Footnote 74:

  The Dukes of York and Sussex were chief mourners, while the pall was
  supported by the Dukes of Bedford and Argyle, the Earl of Lauderdale,
  Lords Mulgrave and Holland, and the Bishop of London. “The coffin,”
  says a writer in the _Universal Review_ for January, 1860, “was borne
  to its resting-place in Westminster Abbey by a crowd of titled and
  illustrious mourners, whose homage to departed genius offered rather a
  suggestive contrast to their late neglect of its living owner:

          ‘How proud they can press to the funeral array
           Of him whom they shunned in his sickness and sorrow.’

  No circumstance of splendid woe was wanting to the burial of him whose
  last illness had been embittered by the falling away of friends, and
  the growing pressure of pecuniary troubles, and whose last hours were
  passed under his own roof only through the kindness or calculating
  fears of a sheriff’s officer.”

Footnote 75:

  New Hall originally belonged to Waltham Abbey, but in the reign of
  Edward III. passed by exchange into the possession of Sir John
  Shardelowe. During the wars of the Roses it was bestowed upon
  Bortello, Earl of Ormond, a zealous Lancastrian, who was taken
  prisoner at Towton, and beheaded. The Manor House was fortified by his
  brother, by permission of Henry VII. It was obtained, by exchange, by
  Henry VIII., who erected it into an Honour, gave it the name of
  Beaulieu, and frequently resided there. After various vicissitudes,
  New Hall was sold to Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, who was
  assassinated by Felton. At a later period it was purchased by Oliver
  Cromwell for five shillings, though yielding a rental of 1300_l._ a
  year. Soon afterwards, however, he gave New Hall, together with a
  considerable sum of money, in exchange for Hampton Court. Some years
  later it was the residence of Monk, Duke of Albemarle, after whose
  time the glories of the place gradually faded away, until the house,
  fast falling to decay, was converted into a convent for English nuns
  of good family.

Footnote 76:

  Buckden Palace, in Huntingdonshire, was granted to the Bishop of
  Lincoln by the Abbot of Ely, in the reign of Henry I.

Footnote 77:

  George Prettyman Tomline, D.D., consecrated Bishop of Lincoln in 1787,
  and promoted to the Bishopric of Winchester in 1820. Mrs. Maltby was
  wife of the Rev. Dr. Maltby, who held the living of Buckden.

Footnote 78:

  Thorndon Hall, the seat of Lord Petrie, about two miles from
  Brentwood.

Footnote 79:

  “Mrs. Lutwyche,” says Madame Piozzi, “has written from Rome; says her
  husband can walk now seven miles a day. They spend their time in
  seeing sights, under the direction of the far-famed Cornelia Knight,
  and rejoicing in the society of the first society of the first city in
  Europe.—January, 1817.” See the second of Mr. Hayward’s very pleasant
  volumes. The date should be 1818, not 1817.

Footnote 80:

  See letter in Appendix—“Death of the PRINCESS CHARLOTTE.]”

  In 1821, Miss Knight again went abroad, and arrived in Paris on the
  12th of May.

Footnote 81:

  Now Count de Chambord. He was born on the 29th of September, 1820. His
  father, the Duke de Berri, was assassinated on the 14th of February in
  the same year, as he was leaving the Opera. The assassin was a
  journeyman saddler, named Louvel, who had previously been a soldier in
  the old Imperial Guard, and who for four years had meditated this
  crime.

Footnote 82:

  The conspiracy of the 19th August, 1820, having for its object the
  overthrow of the Government and the expulsion of the Bourbons. The
  trials of the conspirators terminated on the 17th July, 1821, when
  three of them were condemned to death, and six others to various terms
  of imprisonment, with or without fines.

Footnote 83:

  Marie Amélie, daughter of Ferdinand IV., King of the Two Sicilies, by
  Caroline of Austria, Queen of the French from 1830 to 1848. In the
  revolution of February the Château de Neuilly was sacked and fired by
  the mob. The Duke de Chartres here mentioned was afterwards Duke of
  Orleans, killed by leaping from his carriage whilst his horses were
  running away.

Footnote 84:

  The Congress at Laybach.

Footnote 85:

  Described in Lord Holland’s “Foreign Reminiscences” as “a man of
  strict veracity and accurate memory.” He had a very confidential
  interview with the Emperor Napoleon at the island of Elba.

Footnote 86:

  The celebrated Baron Denon, Directeur-Général des Musées under the
  first Empire, and author of a remarkable work upon the monuments of
  Egypt.

Footnote 87:

  The St. Swithin of the French calendar. His festival falls on the 8th
  of June.

Footnote 88:

  The Abbé de Montesquiou-Fénezac was born in 1757, and was the chief
  author of the Charter of 1814. In the following month of July he was
  appointed Minister of the Interior, and rendered himself unpopular to
  the ultra-Royalists by his moderation and liberality. On one occasion,
  after he had been violently abused for his impartiality, which was
  called favouring the Revolutionists, he quietly remarked “que le Roi
  ne connaissait point de révolutionnaires; qu’il ne venait pas pour
  punir la révolution, mais pour la faire oublier.” During the Hundred
  Days he took refuge in England, and after the second restoration he
  was created a Peer of France, and allowed to retain the title of
  Minister of State, but he took no further part in public affairs.

Footnote 89:

  Stanislas, Marquis de Boufflers, was born at Lunéville in 1737, and
  was named after the unfortunate King of Poland, his godfather. He was
  educated for the Church, hence he was at first known as L’Abbé de
  Boufflers. But he gave up the Church for the Army, and became a Knight
  of Malta and captain of hussars. In 1791 he fled with Madame de Sabran
  and her son to Berlin, where he soon afterwards married her. In 1800
  he returned to France and published a book entitled “Libre Arbitre,”
  and in 1804 was elected member of the French Academy, as successor to
  Marshal Noailles. The Chevalier died in 1815. He has been described as
  “abbé libertin; militaire philosophe; diplomate chansonnier; émigré
  patriote; républicain courtisan.” His stepson, Count Elzéar Louis
  Marie de Sabran, at a very early age gave proof of uncommon talents.
  He was warmly attached to Madame de Staël, and consequently incurred
  the anger of Napoleon. In 1820 he composed a dithyrambic poem on the
  assassination of the Duke de Berri, which was much thought of at the
  time. His death took place in 1846, in the seventieth year of his age.

Footnote 90:

  The Emperor Napoleon died at St. Helena on the 5th of May, 1821. The
  intelligence was conveyed from Calais to Paris by telegraph. “There
  was a disposition,” says Lord Holland, “in the people of Paris to
  disbelieve in the death of Napoleon, there was more in the middling
  classes to attribute it to poison, and there was some in the Court to
  affect the magnanimity of stifling all resentment towards the departed
  hero. Mourning was worn by many, especially on the 15th August, the
  festival of St. Napoleon. Publications on his character, life, and
  death, were numerous, and generally more full of commendation than of
  censure. Portraits, engravings, and prints in allusion to his exile
  and death were bought up with an avidity which alarmed the police, and
  led to the temporary suppression of the exhibition of such articles in
  the shops.”—_Foreign Reminiscences_, p. 205.

Footnote 91:

  The coronation of George IV. took place on the 19th July, and the
  Queen died on the 7th of August following. A riot took place on the
  15th, when her body was removed from Brandenburg House to be taken to
  Harwich for embarkation, the populace being determined that the
  funeral procession should pass through the City of London, against the
  wishes of the Government. Queen Caroline was buried at Brunswick on
  the 24th, between her father and her brother.

Footnote 92:

  Larive, a celebrated French tragedian, born at La Rochelle in 1749. He
  was a pupil of Mademoiselle Clairon, and was considered inferior only
  to Lekain and Talma. He retired from the stage at a comparatively
  early age, and settled down on his beautiful little property at
  Monlignon, in the valley of Montmorency.

Footnote 93:

  The change of Ministry took place on the 14th. M. Villèle continued in
  power till January, 1828, when he was created a Peer of France, and
  retired into private life.

Footnote 94:

  Princess Elizabeth, third daughter Of George III., born May 22, 1770,
  married the Landgrave of Hesse Homburg, April 7, 1818.

Footnote 95:

  Princess Charlotte Augusta Matilda, eldest daughter of George III.,
  born September 29, 1766, married May 18, 1797, to Frederick Charles
  William, Hereditary Prince of Würtemberg, who, by the treaty of
  Lunéville, was raised to the dignity of Elector in 1803. Through the
  favour of Napoleon, and by virtue of the Convention of Presburg, he
  was declared King of Würtemberg on January 1, 1806. He died in 1816.
  His widow, by reason of her universal benevolence, was called “the
  good Queen-Dowager.” She died October 6, 1828.

Footnote 96:

  Lady Mary was the only daughter of Charles, third Earl of Aylesbury,
  by his third wife, Caroline, daughter of John Campbell, Duke of
  Argyle, who survived him and married, not General Conway, but General
  Henry Seymour, brother of the first Marquis of Hertford. Lady Mary
  Bruce married Charles, third Duke of Richmond, and died without issue.
  Thomas Brudenell took the name and arms of Bruce in addition to his
  own, and in 1776 was created Earl of Aylesbury, the title having
  become extinct at the death of his uncle. The Count of Horn married
  Charlotte, daughter of Thomas, third Earl of Elgin and second of
  Aylesbury, by his second wife, Charlotte Countess of Samm, of the
  House of Argenteau in Brabant. It was Robert, second Earl of Elgin,
  who, for his devoted loyalty to Charles I. and Charles II., was
  created Earl of Aylesbury.

Footnote 97:

  Afterwards Lord High Admiral of Prussia. He distinguished himself in
  an attack on the Riff pirates. His brother, Prince Waldemar, travelled
  in India, and was present at the battle of Ferozeshuhur, under the
  incognito of Count Ravensburg.

Footnote 98:

  The present Duke of Cambridge, Commander-in-Chief of her Majesty’s
  Forces. Princess Augusta was then only two years old, and is described
  in Miss Knight’s Diary as being “very pretty;” “they are both fine
  children.”

Footnote 99:

  Sophia Dorothea, daughter of the Duke of Zell. After the assassination
  of her paramour, Count Philip de Kœnigsmark, she was confined in the
  Castle of Dahlen. She died in 1727, only a few months before George I.

Footnote 100:

  His first wife was the Princess Augusta Carolina Frederica Louisa of
  Brunswick, married 1780, died 1787.

Footnote 101:

  Lord Prudoe, Lord Caermarthen, Lord Pelham, Lord Hopetoun, Lord
  Hervey, and Lord Strathmore. Sir W. W. Wynne, Colonel Clive, and
  Captain Perry were also attached to the Duke of Northumberland.

Footnote 102:

  These riots were speedily suppressed by the resolute daring of the
  Emperor Nicholas, who ascended the throne December 26, 1825.

Footnote 103:

  Married in 1831 to M. Emile de Girardin. Mademoiselle Delphine Gay was
  born at Aix-la-Chapelle about the year 1800, and in 1822 competed for
  the prize offered by the Academy for the best poem “Sur le Dévouement
  des Médecins Français et des Sœurs de Sainte Camille pendant
  l’Epidémie de Barcelone.” Had she conformed to the conditions, she
  would have gained the prize; as it was, it was read aloud by M.
  Alexandre Duval, and created a great sensation. The consecration of
  Charles X., the deaths of General Foy and of Mathieu de Montmorency,
  and other subjects, furnished themes for this accomplished poetess.
  After her marriage she frequently contributed feuilletons to the
  _Presse_ under the name of Vicomte Delaunay, and also published some
  novels of considerable merit. Her last literary work was the popular
  drama, “La Joie fait Peur.”

Footnote 104:

  Count Alexis de Saint Priest, author of several tragedies, and also of
  historical works of more than average merit.

Footnote 105:

  It is amusing to contrast the well-bred kindliness of feeling with
  which Miss Knight accepts the dresses presented to her by the
  Queen-Dowager of Würtemberg, with the under-bred fussiness displayed
  by Miss Burney, when Queen Charlotte presumed to send her a gown by
  the hands of Madame Schwellenburg.

Footnote 106:

  In conformity with diplomatic usage, Russia being the youngest member
  of the great European family. The Duke of Wellington it will be
  remembered, called the battle of Navarino an “untoward accident.” It
  was fought on the 20th October, 1827.

Footnote 107:

  M. de Vathnesuil, one of the six Advocates-General of the Court of
  Cassation.

Footnote 108:

  During the greater part of March, Miss Knight had been confined to her
  room by severe illness.

Footnote 109:

  Diebitch’s army had melted “like snow at the glance of the Lord” by
  the time he reached Adrianople. The Treaty of Adrianople saved the
  remnants of the Russian forces rather than Constantinople.

Footnote 110:

  “It has been asserted” (says Lord Holland in his “Foreign
  Reminiscences,” p. 87) “that his (Manuel Godoy’s) marriage with the
  daughter of the Infant Don Luis originated in a malicious trait of
  jealousy of the Queen. The story goes, that she brought the King
  unexpectedly to the apartment of the favourite, and surprised him when
  supping tête-à-tête with Mademoiselle Tudo (the daughter of an
  artillery officer), a lady of extraordinary beauty, to whom he was
  clandestinely married, though some say by a contract which the laws
  would consider as invalid; that the King was partly shocked and partly
  diverted at the discovery; that he shortly afterwards, at the
  suggestion of the Queen, with a view of providing, without the peril
  of a deadly sin, for the incontinence of his favourite, insisted on
  matrimony, and condescended to offer his young and recently
  acknowledged cousin for a bride; that the Prince of the Peace, not
  daring to acknowledge his union with the Tudo, and still less to
  decline the royal alliance without alleging some such insurmountable
  bar, prevailed on the wife of his affections to suppress the truth,
  and allowed Charles, in his zeal to rescue him from more venial and
  ordinary vices, to involve him in the heinous and troublesome sin of
  bigamy. I do not vouch for the truth of the tale. Well-informed
  persons believed it, and related it to me. It is certain that the
  ostensible marriage with the Princess, which took place in 1797, never
  interrupted his connexion with the Tudo. During his prosperity, she
  was generally lodged in a royal palace, or in an adjoining apartment.
  After his exile and adversity, she followed him to Rome, and has
  always been treated by him, his friends, and even the Royal Family, as
  a personage in some sort legitimately entitled to the society,
  tenderness, and protection of the Prince of Peace.”

Footnote 111:

  Signor Horatio Pallavicini quitted his native country and settled in
  the Netherlands, where he married a woman of low extraction. On her
  death, he crossed over into England, and was appointed by Queen Mary
  collector of the papal taxes gathered in the kingdom. At Mary’s
  decease he happened to have thus a large sum of money in his
  possession, and accordingly turned Protestant. His talents and
  knowledge of continental languages rendered him very useful to Queen
  Elizabeth, who conferred upon him the honour of knighthood. In the
  following year he fitted out and commanded a ship against the Spanish
  Armada, and his portrait was placed among those of the patriots who
  distinguished themselves on that occasion in the tapestry that hung in
  the old House of Lords. He died in 1600, leaving his second wife,
  daughter of Egidius Hooftman of Antwerp, in possession of immense
  wealth. In the following year she married Sir Oliver Cromwell, uncle
  and godfather of the Protector. Two sons and a daughter by her former
  husband, Sir Horatio Pallavicini, married two daughters and a son of
  her second husband by _his_ former wife. It does not appear that Lady
  Cromwell ever visited Genoa at all. Her son Oliver may have done so,
  as he was certainly a student at Padua. He was killed by the fall of
  some buildings at Rome. There is no mention of any other member of the
  family going to Italy. See the Rev. Mark Noble’s “Memoirs of the
  Protectoral House of Cromwell.”

Footnote 112:

  This story is told on the authority of the Countess d’Uglas.

Footnote 113:

  “Massacre them!”

Footnote 114:

  The Princess Dashkoff, who had been the chief instigator of the
  conspiracy against Peter III. The ribbon worn by the Princess was
  torn, it is said by her own hands, from the person of her sister, the
  Countess Woronzow, the mistress of the unfortunate monarch; both of
  them being the daughters of Chancellor Woronzow.

Footnote 115:

  The murder of the Czar did not take place for some days after his
  dethronement. If there be any truth in this story, which is
  questionable, it must have been the tidings of the success of the
  conspiracy that the Princess was so anxiously expecting.

Footnote 116:

  At a later period, Paul was by no means remarkable for his conjugal
  fidelity. Of his personal appearance the following mention is made in
  Masson’s “Memoires Secrètes,” quoted by Mr. Kelly in his “History of
  Russia,” vol. ii. p. 154: “It is said that the people of Paris,
  crowding to see Paul, then a youth, cried, ‘My God, how ugly he is!’
  and that he had the good sense to laugh at it. He is not improved
  since he is grown old, bald, and wrinkled. The Empress appears by his
  side like one of those beautiful women who are painted with a little
  deformed blackamoor near them, as a contrast to their dignity and
  grace. The singularity which he affects in his dress, and the severity
  of his manners, add greatly to his deformity. Without excepting even
  the Kalmuks and the Kirghaz, Paul is the ugliest man in his extensive
  dominions; and he himself considers his countenance as so shocking,
  that he dares not impress it upon his coin.” Miss Knight herself
  describes the Grand-Duke, in one place, as “the ugliest man I ever
  saw;” but this was before he had spoken to her.

Footnote 117:

  Told on the authority of the Abbé Gabriel.

Footnote 118:

  Père Jacquier died at Rome in 1787.

Footnote 119:

  At the time of the flight to Varennes.

Footnote 120:

  Through Miss Knight’s influence with Sir William Hamilton he was
  shortly afterwards restored to liberty. His family showed her the most
  grateful attentions when, in after years, she much frequented Paris.

Footnote 121:

  This is explained elsewhere.

Footnote 122:

  In inducing the King of Prussia to join the Allies against France.

Footnote 123:

  The Viscount de Materosa and Don Diego de la Vega.

Footnote 124:

  As the ship conveying the Queen of France and the Duchess d’Angoulême
  and suite passed Admiral Russell’s fleet, “the gallant veteran saluted
  the illustrious visitors with a royal salute.” Her Majesty landed at
  Harwich on the 29th August.

Footnote 125:

  In the Annual Register for 1809, this inscription is ascribed to her
  Royal Highness the Princess Elizabeth.

Footnote 126:

  The anecdotes relating to Boswell were given to Miss Knight by Mrs.
  Piozzi.

Footnote 127:

  This is also stated in the Autobiography, vol. i. page 19.

Footnote 128:

  This anecdote is related on the authority of Baron Wrangel, and is
  also mentioned in Wraxall’s “Memoirs of his own Time.” It was said
  that this “Russian lady of high rank” was a daughter of the Empress
  Elizabeth by Alexis Ragumofsky, and that the English Consul, Mr. John
  Dick, assisted Count Alexis Orloff in luring her on board the Russian
  fleet. But Mr. Kelly states that she was “an adventurer who called
  herself Countess Tarakanoff: he allured her on board his ship and sent
  her to Petersburg.”—_History of Russia_, vol. ii. p. 57.

Footnote 129:

  “You cardinals want to give us the go-by in everything.”




                                  THE END.




                    C. WHITING, BEAUFORT HOUSE, STRAND.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




    ● Transcriber’s Notes:
       ○ Missing or obscured punctuation was silently corrected.
       ○ Typographical errors were silently corrected.
       ○ Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation were made consistent only
         when a predominant form was found in this book.
       ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores
         (_italics_).







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Autobiography of Miss Cornelia Knight,
lady companion to the Princess Charlot, by Ellis Cornelia Knight

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MISS CORNELIA KNIGHT, VOL 2 ***

***** This file should be named 58557-0.txt or 58557-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/5/5/58557/

Produced by MWS, Barry Abrahamsen and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

