
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 73104 ***


Israel Rank
The Autobiography of a Criminal

by Roy Horniman



A Preliminary Note

There is an old saying, ‘Murder will out.’ I am really unable to see
why this should be so. At any rate, it is a statement impossible of
proof, and one which must always remain a matter of opinion. Because
certain clumsy criminals have placed themselves in full view of that
dull dog, the Law, we are asked to believe that crime is invariably
awkward. The logic is not very obvious. I am convinced that many a
delightful member of society has found it necessary at some time or
other to remove a human obstacle, and has done so undetected and
undisturbed by those pangs of conscience which Society, afraid of
itself, would have us believe wait upon the sinner.

    Israel Rank.



Chapter I

It was the close of a bleak, autumnal afternoon. All day long in the
chill and windy atmosphere the dust had been driven helter-skelter
along the shabbier streets of Clapham, whirling with it the leaves
which had fallen from the depressed trees in the gardens of the
innumerable semi-detached villas. Here and there, fragments of torn
paper rustled spasmodically along the gutter as the driving gust
caught them, or—now that the dusk had fallen—floated spectrally for a
few moments in mid-air, like disembodied spirits, essaying an upward
flight, only to be baulked by a lull in the wind and to come suddenly
to earth again, where they lay until the next gust of wind caught
them.

Among the dismal streets not one was more depressing than Ursula
Grove. As if to deprive it of the least trace of individuality it was
but a connecting link between two more important residential roads
running parallel with each other, and even these were not very
important; hence it is obvious that Ursula Grove was humble indeed.

Each house had a yard or two of front garden entered through cheaply
varnished wooden gate-lets, which announced in faded gold lettering
that should anyone enter he would find himself in Seaview, or on The
Riviera, as the case might be. Provided the name was inappropriate
there appeared to have been no initial objection to its being
anything. In fact, those responsible for the christening of these
desirable residences appeared to have acted on the same principle as
the small builder, who, erecting houses at too great a rate to be able
to waste time in seeking appropriate names, was accustomed to choose
them haphazard out of the newspapers, and thus christened two small
stucco atrocities joined together in semi-detached matrimony, the
Vatican and the Quirinal, because these two names appeared in the
course of the same leading article.

Each house had a little bow window which belonged to the drawing-room.
If these bow windows could have been removed and all the little
drawing-rooms placed, as it were, on exhibition they would have
presented an extraordinary likeness. There were the same three or four
saddle-bag chairs, the same saddle-bag sofa, the same little bamboo
occasional table, and the same little gilt mirror; all luxuries that
were rewarded, apparently, by their own virtue and a sense of their
own unique beauty, for it was seldom that their owners enjoyed them.
In the summer the blinds were kept down for fear the sun should spoil
the carpet, which it certainly would have done if it had been allowed
a fair field and no favour with the gaudy little stiff squares of
cheap Kidderminster. These front rooms, although infinitely the
largest and most convenient in the house, were never degraded to the
level of living rooms, however large the family. Sometimes in the
winter a fire was lighted on Sundays and the inhabitants sat round it,
but by Monday morning at breakfast time all traces of this revel had
disappeared, and the fire ornaments were back again, trailing their
gilded and tawdry finery over a highly polished grate, glittering out
on the darkened, frosty room, that suggested nothing so much as the
laying out of a corpse.

These chilly arcadias were the pride of their owners’ hearts, and if,
when about their household work, they heard the door of the sacred
apartment open they were immediately on the alert.

“Willie, what are you doing in the drawing-room?”

“Nuffin’, mama, I was only havin’ a look.”

“Then come out and shut the door immediately.”

Willie, old enough to be troublesome, but not old enough to go to
school, would do as he was bid, at the same time impressed by his
mother’s admonition with a sense of the splendour of the mansion in
which it was his privilege to dwell.

The family always lived in the smaller sitting-room—an apartment
rendered oblong by the exigencies of the staircase. These rooms were
invariably furnished, as were the drawing-rooms, with a depressing
similarity: two horse-hair arm chairs with the springs in a state of
collapse; six ordinary dining-room chairs to match; some framed
_Graphic_ Christmas numbers on the wall, an untidy bookcase, and the
flooring a waste of linoleum with a little oasis of moth-eaten rug
before the fire.

I mention these facts because the atmosphere of my childhood is
important in view of my after development.

It was on such an evening as I have described—at least, I am credibly
informed that it was so—that my father descended from his ’bus two or
three streets off, and, after threading his way through the
intervening maze of semi-detached villadom, entered the depressing
length of Ursula Grove.

An unusual though not astonishing sight met his eyes. The blinds of
the first-floor-front of his own house were drawn down and a bright
light from within glowed against them and streamed from under them. It
could not be his wife dressing for dinner, for they did not have
dinner, and had they been in the habit of dining neither of them would
have thought of dressing. Their evening meal was tea; it might be with
an egg or it might be with ham, but it was certainly tea.

My father hastened his footsteps. The cause of this phenomenon had
suddenly dawned on him. He opened the wooden gate-let with unwonted
gentleness and without letting it swing to, which was the usual signal
that he had come home. Then he went round to the back and softly let
himself in.

He walked along the passage and paused at the foot of the stairs.
There was borne down to him from above the wail of an infant. He was
obliged to catch hold of the bannisters, for his heart leapt into his
mouth and nearly suffocated him.

He sat down on the stairs to recover himself, while the tears of joy
and pride welled into his tired eyes and flowed down his faded cheeks.

The doctor on his way downstairs nearly fell over him.

“Come, come, Mr. Rank, you must bear up. ‘In the midst of life we are
in death.’”

Apparently the doctor was condoling from force of habit. The speech
was certainly alarming, and my father whitened.

“But my wife?”

“Mother and child, Mr. Rank, both doing well. It’s a boy.”

The alarm disappeared from his face. He was a father at last. “An
Isaac was born unto him.”

“May I go up?” he asked timidly.

“Most certainly, but be careful not to excite the patient.”

My father went upstairs and knocked nervously. The nurse opened the
door holding me in her arms. It is to my father’s credit, however,
that he hardly cast a look at the desire of their married life, but
crossed at once to the bed.

My poor mother looked up tenderly and lovingly at the dowdy little
figure bending over her, and smiled.

“It’s a boy,” she whispered, and then added: “We wanted a boy.”

My father pressed her hand gently, but remembering the doctor’s
instructions not to excite the patient kissed her lips and stole
gently out to look at his first, though somewhat late, born. A
puckered face, to which the blood rushed spasmodically, clouding it
almost to the suggestion of apoplexy, was all he could see. My father
looked down at me and saw that I was dark. I could not well have been
otherwise if he were to believe himself my father, for he was Jewish
from the crown of his well-shaped head to the soles of his rather
large feet.

If my mother is to be credited, he was when she fell in love with him
a singularly handsome little man, but at the time of my birth the
physical blight which falls on nearly all men of our race towards
middle age was upon him.

She possessed a small cabinet photograph of him, taken when such
things were a novelty. In early years I was accustomed—misled by the
out-of-date clothes—to regard it as a very frumpish affair indeed.
When I grew up I came to think otherwise: for one day, placing my hand
over the offending clothes, there looked out at me a face which,
granting the wonderful complexion which my mother always insisted he
possessed, was singularly handsome and very like my own.

I only remember him as a faded little creature, who had run to stomach
to an extent which was absurd, especially when it was contrasted with
the extreme thinness of the rest of his body. He was a commercial
traveller, and always attributed this inharmonious excrescence on an
otherwise slim form to the amount of aerated waters he was obliged to
mix with those drinks the taking of which was indispensable to his
calling.

My mother was dark too, so it was little wonder that such hair as I
had when I was born was of the blackest imaginable hue, as likewise
were my eyes.

“He’s a beautiful baby; a bit small, but beautiful,” said the nurse.

My father, who could not at the moment dissociate my appearance from
Mr. Darwin’s theory of the origin of species, tried to believe her,
and stole downstairs, where he made his own tea and boiled himself a
couple of eggs. A meat pie with the unbaked crust lying beside it
suggested that I had arrived quite unexpectedly, as indeed had been
the case. This perhaps accounted for the fact that as a baby I was
weakly.

Before the first year of my life was over, my doting parents had gone
through many an agony of suspense, and my father had more than once
slackened his steps on returning home after his day’s work, fearing to
enter the house lest my mother should meet him and weeping inform him
that the tiny thread of life, by which I was alone prevented from
flying away and becoming a little angel, had snapped.

But by dint of the greatest care from a mother, who, whatever may have
been her coldness to the outside world, possessed a burning affection
for her husband and child, I was brought safely to my first birthday.

Sitting here during the last few unpleasant days with nothing to
entertain me but the faces of ever-changing warders—whose
personalities seem all to have been supplied from one pattern—I have
had time to think over many things, and I have more than once
reflected whether I would not rather my mother had been less careful
and had allowed the before mentioned tiny thread to snap.

My present nervousness, which even my worst enemy will find excusable,
tempts me to regret that her extreme care was so well rewarded. My
intellect, however, which has always shone brightly through the murk
of my emotions, tells me—and supports the information with irrefutable
logic—that I am an ignoble fool to think anything of the kind. I
question whether Napoleon would have foregone his triumphant career to
escape St. Helena. The principle involved in his case and my own is
the same. I have had a great career; I am paying for it—only
fortunately the public are asking an absurdly low price. It is only
when I have smoked too many cigarettes that I feel nervous about
Monday’s ceremony.

One thing I trust, however, and that is that my mother will not in any
way be made unhappy, for should her spirit have the power of seeing my
present condition, and of suffering by reason of it, it would give me
the greatest concern.

But to resume. My arrival must have been an immense comfort to my
mother even more than to my father. His business frequently took him
away from home for a week at a time, and although he rarely failed to
be with us from Saturday till Monday the shabby little Clapham house
had been very dull till my shrill baby cries broke the silence of his
absence.

Until I arrived to keep her company my mother had been thrown almost
entirely on her own resources, and the reason of this loneliness is
also the reason of my strange career. They are inseparable one from
the other.

My mother had married beneath her. Her father had been a solicitor in
a fair way of business, blessed with one son and one daughter. They
were not rich but they were gentlefolk, and by descent something more.
In fact, only nine lives stood between my mother’s brother and one of
the most ancient peerages in the United Kingdom.

My mother’s maiden name was Gascoyne, and her father was the
great-grandson of a younger son. Her father’s family had for the last
two generations drifted away from, and ceased to have any acquaintance
with, the main and aristocratic branch of the family. Beyond a couple
of ancestral portraits, the one of Lord George Gascoyne, my mother’s
great-grandfather, and the other of that spendthrift’s wife, there was
no visible evidence that they were in any way of superior social
extraction to their well-to-do but suburban surroundings.

My father and mother were brought together in this way. My mother’s
brother belonged to a cricket club of which my father was also a
member. The two struck up a friendship, although at a first glance
there could appear to be very little in common between the successful
solicitor’s heir and the junior clerk in a wholesale city house. My
father, however, had a gift of music which recommended him strongly to
his new friend, and, as my mother always said, a natural refinement of
manner which made him a quite possible guest at the quasi-aristocratic
house of the Gascoynes.

“Perhaps I was sentimental and foolish,” my mother would say, with
that quiet, unemotional voice of hers which caused strangers to doubt
whether she could ever be either, “but he had such beautiful eyes and
played in such an unaffected, dreamy way. And he was so good,” she
would add, as if this were the quality which in the end had impressed
her most. “He might have been much better off than he was, only he
never could do anything underhand or mean. I don’t think such things
ever even tempted him. He was simply above them.”

My father became a great favourite with the household till he
committed the intolerable impertinence of falling in love with Miss
Gascoyne. From the position of an ever welcome guest he descended to
that of a “presuming little Jewish quill-driver,” as my uncle—whose
friendship for him had always been of a somewhat patronising
order—described him.

In fact, my uncle was considerably more bitter in denouncing his
presumption than my grandfather, who, his first irritation over, went
so far as to suggest that the best should be made of a bad job, and
that they should turn him into a lawyer, urging his nationality as a
plea that his admission into the firm was not likely to do any harm.

But my uncle was certainly right in receiving such a proposal with
derision.

“He hasn’t even got the qualities of his race,” he said—although this
very fact had been, till their quarrel, a constantly reiterated
argument in my father’s favour.

My father and mother were forbidden to meet, and so one Sunday
morning—Sunday being the only day on which my father could devote the
whole day to so important an event—my mother stole out of the house
and they were married before morning service, on a prospective income
of a hundred a year. As mad a piece of sentimental folly as was ever
perpetrated by a pair of foolish lovers.

The strange thing was that they were happy. They loved one another
devotedly, and my grandfather—though quite under the thumb of my
uncle—surreptitiously paid the rent of the small house where they
spent the whole of their married life, and which after a time, still
unknown to my uncle, he bought for them. My uncle, whom even when I
was a child I thought a singularly interesting man—and the
estrangement was certainly one of the griefs of my mother’s life—had a
great opinion of himself on account of the family from which he was
derived.

He made a point of having in readiness all proofs of his claim to the
title in case the extraordinary event should happen of the intervening
lives going out one after the other like a row of candles. His
researches on the subject enabled him to show a respectable number of
instances in which an heir even as distant as himself had succeeded.

My mother’s unequal marriage caused him to make all haste in choosing
a wife. He might not have betrayed nearly so much antipathy to my
father as a brother-in-law had not the Gascoyne earldom been one of
the few peerages capable of descending through the female line. Thus,
till he should have an heir of his own, his sister and any child of
hers stood next in succession.

He chose his wife with circumspection. She was the daughter of a
baronet, not so reduced as to have ceased to be respectable; and the
main point was that the match would look well on the family tree. To
his infinite chagrin his first child died an hour after birth, and
Mrs. Gascoyne suffered so severely that a consolation was impossible.
It thus became inevitable that should the unexpected happen the title
would pass after himself to his sister and her children.

He drew some comfort from the fact that so far my father and mother
had no child.

Whether it was the disappointment of his own childlessness, or a
natural disposition to ostentation, I do not know, but from this time
my uncle’s mode of living grew more extravagant.

Through the death of my grandfather he became the head of the firm. He
left the suburbs where he had been born, and he and his wife set up
house in the West End, where they moved in a very expensive set, so
expensive, in fact, that in less than five years my uncle, to avoid
criminal proceedings—which must have ensued as the result of a
protracted juggling with clients’ money—put a bullet through his
brains.

He was much mourned by my father and mother, who had both loved him.
He was a fine, handsome fellow, good-natured at heart, and they had
always deemed it certain that one day a reconciliation would take
place.

Inasmuch as my parents had never met my aunt she could not become less
to them than she had been, but evidently to show how little she
desired to have anything to do with them, she allowed their letter of
condolence to remain unanswered. Those who were responsible for
winding up my uncle’s affairs forwarded to my mother, in accordance
with his wishes, the portrait of my ancestor, Lord George Gascoyne,
together with an envelope containing a full statement of her claim to
the Gascoyne peerage. My father, who was certainly more interested
than ever my mother was in the documents that constituted this claim,
took charge of them, and I believe that at my birth not a little of
his elation was due to the fact that he was the parent of a being so
exalted as to be only nine removes from an earldom. In time he came to
regard himself as a sort of Prince Consort whose claims as father of
the heir-apparent could not fail to be substantial.

I don’t think there ever was a child more devotedly tended than I was.
Arriving late, and being the only one, my parents were able to afford
positive extravagances in the way of extra-quality perambulators and
superfine toys, and in my earliest years it would have been quite
impossible for me to guess that I was other than the child of
affluence.

I was christened Israel Gascoyne Rank. From my earliest years,
however, I cannot remember being called anything but Israel, and in my
childhood if I were asked my name I was sure to answer “Israel Rank,”
and equally sure to supplement the information by adding, “and my
other name is Gascoyne—Israel Gascoyne Rank.”

I suppose that it is due to my sense of humour—which has never
deserted me and which I trust will not do so even at the last trying
moment—that I cannot help feeling just a trifle amused at the idea of
my saintly mother and my dear, lovable little father carefully
bringing up—with all the love and affection which was in them—_me_. It
must be admitted to have its humorous side.

I played about the dingy house at Clapham during my happy childhood
and was strangely contented without other companionship than my
mother’s. I certainly betrayed no morbid symptoms, but was, on the
contrary, noted for a particularly sunny disposition. My mother
declared that my laugh was most infectious, so full was it of real
enjoyment and gaiety.

I have always attributed my psychological development along the line
it afterwards took to a remark made to my mother by a woman who used
to come in and sew for her.

I was playing just outside the room with a wooden horse, when Mrs.
Ives remarked as she threaded the needle preparatory to driving the
machine: “Lord, mum, I do believe that boy of yours gets handsomer
every time I come. I never see such a picture, never.”

I was quite old enough to grasp the remark, and for it to sink deep
into my soul, planting there the seeds of a superb self-consciousness.
From that moment I was vain. I grew quite used to people turning to
look at me in the streets, and saying: “What a lovely child!” and in
time felt positively injured if the passers-by did not testify openly
to their admiration. My mother discouraged my being flattered—I
suppose from the point of view of strict morality, with which I cannot
claim acquaintance. Flattery is bad, and yet at the same time it
always seems an absurd thing to talk to and bring up a child of
exceptional personal attractions as if he or she were quite ordinary.
If he be a boy, he is told that personal attractions are of no
consequence, things not to be thought of and which can on no account
make him better or worse, and then, whether girl or boy, the child
finds on going out into the world that it is as valuable a weapon as
can be given to anybody, that to beauty many obstacles are made easy
which to the plain are often insuperable, and that above all his moral
direction and his looks stand in very definite relation.

It was of no use telling me that I was not exceptionally good-looking;
I grasped the fact from the moment of Mrs. Ives’ flattering little
outburst.

My father was immensely proud of my appearance; I suppose the more so
because he could claim that I was like him and that I did not resemble
the Gascoynes in any way.

I was dark and Jewish, with an amazingly well-cut face and an
instinctive grace of which I was quite conscious. I have never known
from my childhood what it was to be ill at ease, and I have certainly
never been shy. I inherited my father’s gift of music. With him it had
never developed into more than what might give him a slight social
advantage; with myself I was early determined it should be something
more, and was quick to see the use it might be in introducing me into
good society.



Chapter II

When I was about seven years of age my father died. I think the cause
was aerated waters, although I remember that on being shown his body
after death it looked so small that my mind hardly established any
very definite relation between it and the weary, kindly little man
with the abnormal waist whom I had known as my father.

My mother must, I am sure, have sorrowed greatly, but she spared my
tender years any harrowing spectacle of grief and set herself
courageously to the task of keeping our home together.

My father had been insured for some five hundred pounds, which brought
my mother in a tiny income. The house fortunately was her own. She
immediately dismissed her one servant and let the front rooms, so that
we were not so badly off after all. My mother, who had hitherto
superintended my education, was now no longer able to do so, as the
house took up most of her time. Certainly, the school I was sent to
was a very much better one than a boy circumstanced as I was could
have expected to attend. It was patronised by a great many sons of the
comparatively wealthy in the neighbourhood, and was by no means
inexpensive. I went right through it from the lowest form to the
highest.

My masters pronounced me quick, but not studious. Personally, I don’t
think highly imaginative people are ever very studious in childhood or
early youth. How is it possible? The imaginative temperament sets one
dreaming of wonderful results achieved at a remarkably small outlay of
effort. It is only the dull who receive any demonstration of the value
of application.

My mother was careful that I should not be dressed so as to compare
unfavourably in any way with my schoolfellows, and managed that I
should always have a sufficiency of pocket-money, advantages which I
hardly appreciated at the time. How she accomplished this I do not
know, but I can honestly say that I never knew what want meant, and
although my mother did all the work of the house herself, and cooked
for the gentleman to whom our front rooms were let, we never lived in
the kitchen or descended to a slovenly mode of life. We had our meals
in quite a well-bred manner in the dining-room, which was also our
living-room.

Our lodger was a mysterious creature who always brought me a handsome
birthday and Christmas present and declined to be thanked. The first
time he saw me he pronounced me to be too good-looking for a boy.

He was gruff and abrupt in manner, but the incarnation of deferential
courtesy to my mother, whom I truly think he worshipped. I believe
that his prolonged residence in our front rooms was not entirely due
to their comfort or to my mother’s cooking.

I am sure he embarrassed her by his chronic efforts to spare her
trouble. By degrees he took to dining out nearly every evening,
although his arrival immediately after the dinner hour showed that he
had no engagement anywhere else.

I have every reason to believe that he made her an offer of marriage,
but if it were so he did not allow her refusal to drive him away. He
remained, and continued to treat her with even greater deference than
before.

Apart from the memory of my father, which she held sacred, her
devotion as a mother would, I think, have kept her from the remotest
contemplation of a second marriage. She lived entirely for me.

I was early made acquainted with the story of the Gascoyne succession,
and it was with a quiet smile of indulgence that my mother told me of
the interest with which my father would watch the ebb and flow of the
heirs that stood between his wife and the peerage.

The idea, however, seized my vivid imagination. I got my mother to
bring out all the papers and I set to work at once to see how far my
claims had advanced or receded since my father’s death.

I was obliged before I could completely determine my position to have
recourse to a Peerage. I was surprised to discover that I had come
appreciably nearer to the succession. There were still six lives
between myself and the peerage, but two branches which had formerly
barred the way had become extinct. Perhaps it will be as well to give
a tree of the succession from the point where the branch to which I
belong came into existence. It must be understood that I do not give
those branches which had died out, or the names of individuals who did
not affect the succession.

                  Henry, tenth Earl Gascoyne
        ____________|____________________________
       |                  |                      |
     Henry             Adalbert                George
       |                  |                   ___|______
       |                  |                  |          |
     Henry             Patrick             Henry      Simeon
    ___|___           ____|____              |        __|___
   |       |         |         |             |       |      |
 Henry  Ughtred   Gascoyne  Ughtred (d.)   Henry   Henry  Ronald
     ______|_        |        _______________|__   (80)   __|___
    |        |       |       |         |        |        |      |
  Henry  Ughtred   Henry   Marma-  Gascoyne  Patrick  George  Mary
     |     (45)    (53)   duke (d.)  (59)      _|_____     (m. Israel
     |                                 |      |       |       Rank)
  Simeon                          Gascoyne   Henry  Edith       |
   (16)                             (17)     (13)   (14)        |
                                                         Israel Rank

It will thus be seen that there was by no means a lack of male heirs
and that my chance was remote indeed. In fact, on going into the
question, so little prospect did there seem of my ever standing near
to the succession that I gave up taking an interest in the matter, at
least for the time being.

In looking back at the development of my character, I am not conscious
of a natural wickedness staining and perverting all my actions. My
career has been simply the result of an immense desire to be somebody
of importance. My chief boyish trait was a love of beauty, whether in
things animate or inanimate. People who have possessed that intangible
something which is known as beauty—that degree of attraction made up
of always varying proportions of line, colour and intelligence—have
invariably done something more than merely attract me; they have
filled me with a burning desire to be obviously in their outlook, to
move for a time within their circumference, to feel that I had left an
indelible impress on their memory, and it was my early appreciation of
a capacity to do this that perhaps fostered my egotism, till it had
become an article of faith with me that I must be someone. I looked
upon the possession of rank or renown as a useful weapon for drawing
attention to myself, of increasing the number of individuals brought
under my personal influence.

I was greedy of importance, because of the beauty it might bring into
life. Naturally the beautiful things in life vary according to
temperament. Romance was to me the chief thing. After all, it is the
salt of existence. Not that I believe romance to be necessarily
conditioned by rank and wealth. A real artist may create it for
himself out of very humble materials. One of the most complete
romanticists I ever met was a coal-heaver, who had a list of
experiences that sounded in the telling like the Arabian Nights
entertainment. At the same time, rank and wealth fascinate the Jew as
much as precious stones. They glitter, and they have value. The
Israelite is probably less of a snob in these matters than the average
Englishman, but as an Oriental he appreciates their decorative effect.
Nevertheless, I doubt very much whether he is ever so far dazzled by
them as to forget his own interests. I most certainly was not. I
should have liked to be Earl Gascoyne. It would have meant grasping
the lever to so many things, and this fact dawned on me more and more
as I grew up.

My distant relationship to the Gascoynes was the cause of some
humiliation to me at school. There was a boy whose father had just
been made an Alderman of the City of London, and he was rather
boastful of the fact.

“Bah! what’s an Alderman?” I asked.

Instinctively the other boys felt that it was not right that one of
Hebraic extraction should make such a remark. They had the intuition
of their race that a Jew is after all a Jew.

“Shut up, Sheeny,” said one.

“Now then, old clo’,” said another.

I was not the possessor of Jewish blood for nothing. Where an English
boy would have struck out I remained Orientally contemptuous of
insult. I merely wondered if the time would ever come when I should be
able to remind Lionel Holland—the last boy who had spoken—of his
insult.

“If six people were to die I should be Earl Gascoyne,” I said grandly.

There arose a shout of laughter.

“Pigs might fly,” said Lionel Holland.

I flushed. The only impression produced by my grandiloquent speech was
that I was a stupid liar. Even my bosom friend Billy Statham shrank
away from me. Such a useless lie offended his sense of propriety.

I was only twelve and had some difficulty in keeping back my tears.

“It’s true,” I asserted.

“How can it be true?” demanded Holland. “You are a Jew and your name
is not Gascoyne.”

“It is—my name is Israel Gascoyne Rank. My mother’s name was
Gascoyne.”

But whatever I said they declined to believe in the possibility of
such a thing. The incident taught me, however, to hold my tongue on
the subject of my noble extraction, and that was a point gained.

I don’t think I was unpopular at school, but I suffered the penalty of
all marked personalities; that is to say, I was very much liked or
very much detested. I was not in one sense of great importance in the
school life. I should have been untrue to myself if I had been. There
is perhaps nothing more remarkable than the false estimate held by
boys of character. Their giants are as often as not the pigmies of
after life. Our school captain at the time I am speaking of was a boy
called Jim Morton. He had a pleasant face bordering on good looks, and
the body, so we thought, of a young Hercules. The basis of his
popularity was a sense of justice and a reticence in the display of
his physical strength. He was most certainly worshipped by the entire
school, including myself, although I was by no means prone to idealise
those in authority. For Jim Morton I had a veritable respect, although
in any case my Jewish blood would have taught me to simulate deference
until I was in a position to betray my true estimate without danger to
my own interests. To my imagination as a small boy he seemed to
possess something Titanic, to tower above everybody else in the school
immeasurably. I met him in after years, an insignificant looking man
with a ragged moustache and a slouch. It was quite a shock, and I
waited for him to open his mouth, sure that his power over my juvenile
imagination must have been a question of intellect. I talked to him
for a long time, hoping for some echo at least of a lost magic. I can
safely say I never met anyone more destitute of ideas, and it seemed
impossible that he could ever have had any. Perhaps had he lived among
savages the primitive virtues which had made him supreme among
boys—and boyish communities are psychologically similar to savage
races—would have developed, and he would have remained a force. It may
be so; I give him the benefit of the doubt. I am inclined to think,
however, that there never had been any personality in the true sense
of the word.

Billy Statham, a boy a year older than myself, I loved. Where my
affections are roused—and I have very strong affections, however much
people may feel inclined to doubt it—I cling like a leech. I am
supremely indifferent to defects in those I love, even when they
affect myself. The only thing I ask is marked characteristics; I am
incapable of concentrating myself on the colourless.

Billy Statham was certainly not colourless. He was gay, emotional, and
beautiful as morning. He was brilliant and indolent. In many ways he
seemed to be the most backward boy in the school, but to accuse him of
being ignorant would have been preposterous. I never knew him tell a
lie, and I never knew him do a dishonest thing; and yet once when a
boy in the school who had been discovered in a flagrant piece of
dishonesty was by general agreement sent to Coventry, Billy Statham
was the one person who treated him as if nothing had happened. I
really think his was the most Christ-like nature I have ever met. He
always seemed to hold on to the intangible something in people which
is above earthly stains. Evil had at times a bewildering effect on
him. I have seen him look quite blank—when a curious look of wonder
did not come into his face—as other boys were discussing matters which
properly belonged to a more adult stage. The impending complexities of
sex into which the other lads were always taking surreptitious peeps
attracted him not at all. It seemed as if he must have possessed some
inward consciousness that his body would never be called upon to take
part in the sterner struggle. When he was fourteen he contracted
rheumatic fever, and was returned to us after a few months with the
roses blanched from his cheeks and the consciousness of a weak heart.
One day he told me that he had heard the doctor say to his parents
that if he had rheumatic fever again he would die. On a damp afternoon
in late autumn we were caught in a heavy downpour and I left him at
his front door shivering. I did not see him alive again, and I have
never known boys so profoundly moved by the death of one of their
number. It seemed as if they realised that something spiritual and
valuable had gone from them in their corporate capacity. He left
behind him the recollection of a nature entirely unspoilt.

To me his death was a profound grief. I have never experienced so
great a friendship for anyone since. At the time, I was unable to
understand why he chose me as his Jonathan, excepting that, as I have
already said, he had the instinct of great minds for grasping the
essentials in human nature and allowing a man’s actions to remain a
matter of opinion. He seldom argued with me. He was content to
influence, and in this he displayed another trait of great natures,
which let fall here and there a truth, but are not prone to
discussion. I have often thought that he might have been the remnant
of a great consciousness, having somewhat, but not a great deal, to
expiate in human form. His goodness seemed to stretch out, invisible,
beyond himself.

When he died I was fourteen, and the firmest of friendships are not at
that age sufficiently strong to leave an inconsolable grief. My next
great friend was a boy of very different character. Grahame Hallward
was the son of a fairly well-to-do City man. They lived in comfortable
style, albeit they were a somewhat uncomfortable family. Wherein their
uncomfortableness lay it would have been difficult to say. They all
had a more than usual share of good looks, and this possibly was their
first attraction for me. Indeed, two of them, Grahame and Sibella,
were quite beautiful to look upon. The family constituted a very
aristocracy of physical gifts, and, despite their peculiar natures, I
was always at my ease among them. It is true that they were inclined
to patronise me, but the qualities of my race enabled me to endure
this without resentment, and even with dignity. It was, however, only
natural; for although I was always neatly dressed, the position of my
mother was well known, and had it been otherwise, the house and street
in which we lived would sufficiently have revealed the truth. In
matters of this sort I was not a snob; besides, I had too quick an
instinct for things well-bred not to realise that my mother was
gentlewoman enough to hold her own with the very best.

One day I took Grahame Hallward home to tea. I think he felt a little
nervous, wondering if tea in the house of such poor people would be a
very uncomfortable affair. I realised from the way in which he
accepted that he was a little surprised at the invitation. He always
had beautiful manners, and he said that of course he would be
delighted to come. The two words “of course!” were a mistake, however,
and I resented them, although I was secretly amused.

He came one day after school, and when we reached the house my mother
was already seated before the urn. There were flowers on the table,
and the linen was spotless. There was a silver teapot and sugar-basin
given to my mother by our lodger on the occasion of his having
completed two years’ residence in the house. His ingenuity in finding
occasions whereon it might be considered suitable to make my mother
and myself presents was quite remarkable. I was entrusted with the
task of calling him in the morning. Hence it became necessary for me
to have a watch, entirely, as he explained, to suit his convenience.
In the same way a piano arrived one day—our own had been sold at my
father’s death—and our lodger explained that it had been left to him
by a distant relation. I gazed at it longingly as it disappeared into
his sitting-room. After a day or two he said that he believed it would
be spoilt unless it were played upon, and asked me as a favour to do
so. Then, having come home once or twice as I was practising hard, he
declared almost irritably that it was inconvenient and that he really
thought considering the time he had been with us we might oblige him
by having it in our sitting-room, but that of course if my mother
objected there was nothing more to be said. He would have sold it had
it not been in his cousin’s house for so many years. Needless to
chronicle that the piano stood henceforward in our sitting-room. Our
suspicions were somewhat aroused when the man who came to tune it gave
as his opinion that the instrument could not be more than two years
old, if that; in fact, he should have said it was brand-new.

My mother was pleased for my sake that she was able to greet my friend
from behind a silver teapot and sugar-basin. I was secretly conscious
of the effect she produced on Grahame. He had, I am sure,
believed—despite all my assurances to the contrary—that my mother was
a Jewess, and he was not a little surprised to find a well-bred
Englishwoman with a reserved and quite distinguished manner. Tea being
over my mother kept us seated, whilst, almost unobserved, she placed
every article from the table on the tray. She was full of manœuvres
for minimising the bustle consequent on the want of a servant. I was
rather nervous of the moment when she would rise and bear forth the
tray. I had set her on such a pinnacle before my friend that I could
not bear that he should see her otherwise than enthroned. I was
painfully conscious that there is no snob like a boy. My mother,
however, had foreseen everything.

“Israel dear, Mr. Johnson has brought home a beautiful old Chinese
cabinet. I am sure Mr. Hallward would like to see it.”

Mr. Hallward—barely fifteen and a half and very flattered at being
referred to as Mr. Hallward—expressed himself as most anxious, and we
adjourned to the front room.

Short as was the time we were gone, on our return all signs of a meal
had disappeared, and my mother was seated before the fire as if she
possessed ten servants instead of her own ten fingers.

Then I played. This was not entirely a novelty; I had often been shown
off at the Hallwards’ house. Indeed, my musical abilities were, I
fancied, often made an excuse when the Hallwards felt that the
presence of my humble self in their mansion occasioned surprise. In
Clapham, residence was everything, and the leading families were a
little suspicious of anyone who lived in a house as small as our own.
Had they been generally aware of the lodger they would have considered
themselves entirely justified in deciding that I was not socially
eligible!

I walked part of the way home with Grahame Hallward.

“I say,” he burst out, “your mother is rippin’.”

If Grahame Hallward said so I knew he meant it. His chief enemy in
life was his tongue. He always had an uncontrollable habit of speaking
his mind.

Sibella Hallward exercised an irresistible fascination over me from
the first moment I saw her. She was undeniably lovely even at an age
when most girls are at their worst. Her hair was deliciously silky and
golden. Her eyes were large and blue, with dark-brown brows and
lashes. Her cheeks were the petals of a blush rose. Her mouth was
perfect and petulant, and the one imperfection with which Nature
invariably salts the cream of the correct was her nose; it was a
little tip-tilted, and seemed to have been made to match her voice,
which was curiously childish and treble, with an acerb complaint in it
that was indescribably delightful. She allowed me to play at
sweet-hearting with her, and then one day when we quarrelled called me
a horrid little Jew. I was possessed by my love for her from that day.
My obsession has never been defensible. She was no excuse for any
man’s love excepting that she was beautiful, and I loved her because
such beauty would confer distinction on the man who won her.

She was vain and shallow, but with a will of her own which was
somewhat remarkable, combined with her other characteristics.

I was constantly at the Hallwards’ house. I was always quarrelling
with Sibella and declaring that I would never visit them any more, but
she invariably managed to lure me back without in any way apologising
or admitting herself to be in the wrong.

At this time she was a shameless little flirt and permitted me to make
love to her, which I did with all the precocity of my semi-oriental
nature. Her parents were a good-natured, indulgent couple, and they
usually alluded to me as Sibella’s sweetheart.

It was not a household where principles counted for much, and most of
the inmates possessing, like Sibella, very strong wills the result was
chaotic. At the same time, they were sympathetic in an egotistical
way. To anybody who like myself was able to hold his own, and also to
put up with them, the household was tolerable and enjoyable. Woe,
however, to any luckless person who found them too fascinating to
avoid and too strong-minded to be battled with! Such an one was ground
to powder by the sheer weight of their egotism.

I suppose it was this egotism that made Grahame Hallward somewhat
unpopular at school. He always bore himself with an extraordinary
pride; not aggressive, but the sort of innate aloofness and
condescension which might have been expected from the member of a
reigning house. It was natural to the family, and even shallow Sibella
possessed it. At times it gave one the impression that she had
dignity, when in reality it was only an aspect of her vanity.

Amongst other things which Grahame Hallward and I had in common was a
dislike of Lionel Holland. We had both suffered from his superior
physical strength, and with Grahame even more than with me this was an
unpardonable offence. Lionel Holland was not deficient in head; he had
great intelligence of a certain kind, and almost a genius for
displaying his mental wares to the best advantage. It was commonly
reported that his father had begun life as a newspaper boy, and
certainly his son’s wit and repartee were of the gutter order
notwithstanding their veneer of middle-class suburbanism. He was
slightly older than either of us and of an altogether stronger type.
We found a means, however, of putting an end to his tyranny. We
engaged in a defensive league, not verbally agreed upon—Grahame would
have been much too proud to admit that such a thing was necessary—but
we got into the way of standing by one another when he commenced to
annoy us. Candour compels me to admit that he was almost a match for
both of us, but we managed to inflict sufficient punishment to make
him consider that the entertainment of baiting us had its risks, and
finally he left us alone.

It was Lionel Holland’s ambition to be captain of the school. He
considered that his brilliance at certain sports entitled him to it,
but somehow he never reached the position he aimed at. The boys did
not trust him. He was deficient in those very qualities that make a
boy’s hero, and they were not to be deceived by the easy insolence of
his manner. I never knew success in the cricket and football field
carry a boy such a little way into his comrades’ hearts. He was a
handsome lad enough, embryon of the flashy, brilliant brute he
afterwards became. I think, but for Grahame and myself, he might have
been elected to the post he coveted. He had more money than any other
boy in the school and spent it freely where he had an object in view.
My friend and I, however, were determined that so unsuitable an
election should not take place. The captain of the school had large
powers, and we had no mind to see ourselves in Lionel Holland’s hands.
Our brains were more astute than his when it came to a real tussle of
intellect. We discredited him in every way possible, and he endured
the humiliation of defeat. A psychologist would have been interested
in noting how, when Lionel Holland’s defeat was an accomplished fact,
the different characteristics of Grahame’s nature and my own displayed
themselves. Grahame, having attained his object, was sorry for his
antagonist. I was unfeignedly glad, and rejoiced in his humiliation to
an extent which was very unpleasing to my friend. We had quite a
quarrel over the matter; and Grahame, whose plain speech never failed,
told me that I was exhibiting the worst faults of the Old Testament,
in that I showed unsportsmanlike exultation over a fallen foe. I ought
perhaps to mention that Lionel Holland had attempted to win me to his
side by asking me to go with him to the Crystal Palace and there
treating me to all the side shows. I enjoyed the outing but took the
liberty of continuing to distrust him; another method of which Grahame
disapproved most strongly. Certainly Lionel Holland would never have
attempted to bribe Grahame. The crudest of perceptions—which his was
not—would at once have seen the futility of such an attempt.

I fancy that I was constantly disappointing my friend, and he was
impatient of any point of view which he was unable to sympathise with.
It was therefore the more remarkable that he should have remained so
staunch. I think that at times his friendship for me was living on his
capital of loyalty, of which he possessed an inexhaustible store. His
loyalty tended to make him very inelastic in argument, but he was
altogether an unexpected person and would on occasions display a
susceptibility to logic which was amazing in one so young.

He was, what most people who knew him superficially hardly suspected,
sensitive to an extraordinary degree. His impassivity deceived them.
He had a horror of death, and Billy Statham’s end affected him more as
a practical example of the inevitability and ruthlessness of bodily
extinction than with regret at the loss of a schoolmate whom like all
of us he had really loved.

He did not believe that my fear of death was not equal to his own, and
concluded that my indifference was affected and mere bravado. In after
years when I explained to him that without having any particular
religious opinions, I regarded this body as a more or less useful
vessel in which to perform part of the voyage of mental evolution, I
found him quite unable to follow me and still possessed by just the
same dread of death. The mere idea terrified him. The sight of all
dead things, even when they happened to be the corpses of quite low
forms of life, filled him with repulsion, and the idea of making him a
doctor, which his father had entertained during his childhood, was
abandoned.

I used to find a certain satisfaction in raising the question of death
in order to see the colour fade out of his cheek. He was too proud to
say that it frightened him, but it did. Fear was so little in his
character that I came to the conclusion that it lay partly in the
extraordinary value he and his family placed on personal appearance,
and that in addition his terror might have its roots in some such
cause as made Catherine de Medici faint when she saw an apple, even if
it were a painted one in a picture.

As a boy I forbore to make him a confidant of my passion for his
sister. Perhaps I realised that he would resent it. I think he
believed that his sisters were fit matches for the most exalted, and
was secretly astonished and disgusted when the eldest married a
struggling young solicitor.

Once, when Sibella had taunted me and teased me past bearing, I threw
the Gascoyne pedigree in her face. I shall never forget the silvery
and maddening laugh of disbelief with which she received the
announcement. She did not even ask me for proof but went on laughing
till I could have struck her. At the moment I hated her. It was on a
half-holiday. I had been asked to tea, and was making love to her in
the schoolroom, waiting for Grahame and his brother to come in from
football.

“When you laugh at me like that,” I said tersely, “I feel as if I
could kill you.”

“And when you tell stories like that,” she said, mimicking my
intonation in her childish treble, “you are simply ridiculous.” She
took another chocolate from the bag of sweets I had brought her. I
used to save up my pocket-money for two or three weeks until I had
sufficient to buy sweets worthy of her acceptance. It is very certain
that had she considered them other than the best she would have told
me so.

“Yes,” she continued, “you are simply ridiculous. Just as if you could
ever be a lord. I don’t believe it! If six people died!” she
concluded, with a laugh which made me feel what I was capable of. I
could have killed her where she stood but for the consequences.

If I held human life cheap I was still possessed of the caution of my
race, and even at that age I loved her. Even at that age indeed!
Looking back at my boyhood I am astonished at the insanity of passion
of which I was capable. There is nothing more narrow than the
scepticism with which older people treat the love-sickness of the
young. Boys love even better perhaps than men ever can. Romeo was, I
am convinced, not more than seventeen or eighteen—that is to say, as
Shakespeare conceived him.

I felt humiliated by her disbelief. I had been anxious to give myself
some importance in her eyes, and instead she treated the whole thing
with absolute derision. That day was to be in every way one of
bitterness. She was standing at the schoolroom window drumming on the
glass, when suddenly she gave a little shrill cry of surprise.

“Oh what fun! Grahame is bringing someone in to tea, and father is
with them.”

I looked out and saw to my annoyance Lionel Holland accompanying
Grahame and his father up the drive. What was the meaning of it?
Surely Lionel Holland had not succeeded in winning Grahame to
friendship! It was hardly likely.

“And I do believe it’s that good-looking boy who won all the prizes at
last year’s sports,” continued Sibella. “Yes, it is!”

I had, even at the age of sixteen, a very genius for the analysis of
character—although analysis is hardly the word. Characters have always
had a way of displaying themselves before me at a bird’s-eye view.
From the first I mistrusted the effect of a handsome and confident
piece of physical splendour on a nature like Sibella’s.

In the hall I could hear Lionel Holland apologising for his mudstained
appearance, and Mr. Hallward’s breezy voice laughing away his
scruples.

“Nonsense, my boy, nonsense, I like to see it. It shows you have been
enjoying yourself in a fine, manly way. Grahame, take your friend
upstairs and let him wash his face and hands.”

Mr. Hallward always took pleasure in the display of jovial
hospitality. In reality he was a somewhat bad-tempered man, but when
he was in the mood for a little display of amateur histrionics there
was no one more genial or hearty.

Sibella was flushed with excitement and I was inwardly fuming.

“What is his name?” she demanded, turning to me as Lionel Holland’s
voice died away upstairs.

“Lionel Holland,” I answered, as cheerfully as I could, determined
that, if possible, I would not betray my annoyance.

“Do you like him?”

“Oh, he is all right.” I might just as well have said plainly that I
disliked him, for Sibella was not deceived. She had a Jezebel’s gift
for detecting antagonisms between those of the opposite sex and
playing upon them. I believe this characteristic invariably
differentiates the woman who uses her sex power for evil from the
woman who uses it for good.

“You don’t like him,” she answered at once. “You are jealous of him.”

“Jealous! Why?”

“Because he plays games better than you do.”

I laughed. It was the last thing that was ever likely to make me
jealous. She saw that the taunt had failed and tried another.

“And also because he is so much better looking than you are.”

I laughed again. From Sibella the absolutely untrue was not
convincing.

But Sibella had a way of thrusting till she thrust home.

“You needn’t laugh—because it’s quite true, and you are also jealous
because he is so much more manly than you are.”

I knew what she meant. Lionel Holland’s flamboyant animalism and sex
assurance stood in her eyes for prime qualities. She was superficially
feminine and loved a brute. The woman of delicate upbringing, who
astonishes her friends by her inexplicable infatuation for a boaster
who is obviously a cad and a bully despite his physical advantages, is
twin sister to the lady of the slums who worships the brute who
blackens her eyes and kicks her as an amusing conclusion to the week’s
work. The poor slut flatters herself that it is evidence of a strength
which he would not fail to use in her defence, forgetting that a bully
is only occasionally a brave man.

I saw what was coming and grew sick at heart. One thing comforted me;
Sibella was a snob, and despite his riches she would never be able to
taunt me with his superior caste.

“I shouldn’t show my jealousy if I were you,” she concluded.

I looked at her quietly.

“You ought to be killed.”

I said the thing I knew would bludgeon her into silence. She shared
Grahame’s fear of death, but in her case it was more ignoble. I
believe if Grahame had been condemned to death his pride would have
overcome his fear. I could imagine Sibella whining and fawning at the
executioner’s feet.

She looked at me with distinct apprehension, and at that moment
Grahame entered the room accompanied by Lionel Holland. Sibella
immediately began to exercise her fascinations and to concentrate the
attention of the visitor on herself. I have often thought since that
Lionel Holland must have manœuvred his invitation to the house, for he
seemed already to have made up his mind how to proceed with Sibella.
He flattered her vanity, said that he remembered her perfectly on the
day of the sports, and declared that he should certainly not have
tried so hard had she not been there.

The younger members of the Hallward household had tea in the
dining-room, and on Saturdays were privileged to bring in their
friends, so that there was generally a large gathering. The tea itself
was a sumptuous affair, and as the elders were seldom present it was
as a rule very enjoyable. Cynthia Hallward, one year older than
Sibella, poured out.

Lionel Holland seemed supremely unconscious that Grahame was not very
pleased at his presence.

I was of course unable to express my displeasure until I was given a
lead. Grahame lingered a minute or two in the school-room with me.

“I wish the Guv’nor would mind his own business,” he said sulkily.

“Didn’t you ask him?”

“Is it likely? He insisted on walking home with me, and just as I was
saying good-bye to him the Guv’nor met us and said ‘Bring your friend
in to tea.’ Friend indeed!” And Grahame snorted.

When we reached the dining-room Sibella had arranged so that Lionel
was on her right and a girl friend of her sister’s on her left. I
verily believe she wanted me to sit opposite to her in order that she
might enjoy the spectacle of my chagrin. She should have known me
better. I betrayed not the least sign of the hatred and wounded vanity
that were surging within me. I was measuring my chances against Lionel
Holland. I was better looking than he was, but not in the way likely
to appeal to Sibella. He was rich; I was far cleverer. It appears to
me on looking back that I quite understood, even at that early stage,
that the incident was the prologue to a drama which would develop
itself in after years. Most boy and girl romances might be ephemeral,
but ours had the promise of permanence. This was the more curious in
that two out of the three, Sibella and Lionel, were entirely
superficial.

I joined in the conversation and laughter with very fair success, but
Sibella was in her most aggravating mood. Cynthia Hallward asked
Lionel Holland what he wanted to be. Apparently he did not quite know,
but some cross-questioning from Sibella elicited the fact that his
only definite ambition was for riches.

“My father wasn’t always rich,” he announced; and, to do him justice,
his pride in the fact that his father was self-made was the
pleasantest trait in his character. “He began without a shilling, and
he says that money is nine-tenths of everything, and he ought to know.
I wouldn’t give twopence to be anything which didn’t bring in money.”

“Wouldn’t you like to be a lord?” said Sibella, looking at me
mischievously.

“It’s quite easy to be a lord if you’re rich enough,” said Lionel.

“Oh, but Israel is going to be a lord. That is to say, when six people
die,” laughed Sibella. And there was that peculiar quality in her
laugh which when it was turned against myself made me feel cruel
towards her.

Lionel Holland laughed too, delighted to assist Sibella in teasing me.

“Israel is always telling us that at school,” he said.

“I’ve only said so once,” I answered, keeping my temper by a violent
effort of self-control, “and it’s perfectly true.” I think there must
have been something in my voice that warned them to desist, for the
subject was allowed to drop.

After tea we adjourned to the school-room. Sibella’s appetite for
sweets was insatiable, and she took the most comfortable seat by the
fire and proceeded to finish the box of chocolates I had brought her.

“Do you like sweets?” I heard Lionel ask. He was sitting by her side.

She handed him the box and he helped himself.

“Awfully.” Sibella’s English was extremely slipshod.

“I’ll send you some. What kind do you like best?”

“Chocolate nougat.”

“Very well. I’ll send you a much bigger box than that.”

Sibella laughed appreciatively. “That will be jolly of you,” she said,
perfectly aware that I could hear. She was evidently entirely dazzled
by her new admirer, but was too much a born flirt to let me go even if
I had had the least intention of retiring from the contest.

Just before I left the house she sidled up to me.

“You’re not angry, are you, Israel?”

I made a faint attempt at a smile as I answered:

“Angry? Of course not. Why should I be?”

Finding me inclined to fence, she assumed her most childish treble.

“I don’t know, I’m sure, only you have been looking so dreadfully
cross.”

I very nearly shook her.

Lionel Holland left the house a few minutes before I did. Grahame
walked with me as far as the gate.

“I say, Israel, what’s that about your being a lord some day?”

“Nothing. I don’t want to go into the matter. Everybody is so beastly
rude about it.”

“Is it true?”

“Of course it is. I’ll show you the papers if you like.”

“I don’t want that. If you say it’s true, of course I believe you.”

But I was secretly determined that Grahame should see the papers, and
I took the earliest opportunity of showing them to him, for I knew
that though he liked me too much to say that he disbelieved me, he
felt that there must be a mistake somewhere.

I explained the whole thing to him and showed him our genealogical
tree.

I fancy he was more surprised than he appeared to be, for although he
had always been very kind to me there had been just the faintest
suspicion of patronage in his manner. It was perhaps only natural. A
semi-Hebrew lad, in humble circumstances, with no prospects to speak
of, was not in the ordinary course of things the most natural
companion for the son of a successful city merchant.

I knew he told Sibella, for she condescendingly informed me that I was
not such a story-teller as she had thought, adding, however, that it
wasn’t very much to boast of, as the six lives between me and the
peerage would probably be sixty-six before very long, and it was quite
evident that the Gascoynes did not even know of my existence. She
became quite friendly again, but when I tried to kiss her she refused
to allow me to do so; or rather, she attempted to prevent it and was
really furious when I did so by force. I detected in her resistance
that I no longer occupied her thoughts. Indeed, I was soon made aware
that I was expected to be content with the place of an ordinary
friend. Lionel Holland managed to be constantly at the house. Grahame
had expressed his disinclination to bring him, but Sibella and her
sister evidently had an understanding by which they were to meet him
by appointment on Saturday afternoons and bring him back to tea. Mr.
and Mrs. Hallward were too easy-going to notice these manœuvres, and
would have treated them quite good-naturedly even had they done so.

The Hallward children were allowed to do pretty well as they liked,
with the result that careful mothers of the neighbourhood, resentful
of their extreme good looks, made Cynthia and Sibella the subject of
much spiteful gossip and whispered inuendoes which I verily believe
had little truth in them. Compelled to stand by and watch Lionel
Holland’s triumph, I suffered terribly, and my mother grew quite
anxious at my appearance, but attributed it to overwork.

Once, and once only, did I implore Sibella to have pity on me. She
laughed in the most silvery manner, and frankly said she was tired of
me. I recall my abjectness with humiliation. Lionel Holland’s was a
nature quite devoid of sympathy for his own sex, and where another lad
might have decently veiled his triumph from his rival, he displayed it
on every possible occasion. His manner was insufferably
self-complacent. He had the natural contempt of all Westerns for
anything Jewish, and he had not the breeding to disguise the fact. He
told a mutual friend that ‘it was just like a beastly little Jew to
make up to a girl like Sibella.’

I affected indifference because I knew the remark had been repeated to
me with the object of goading me into fighting him; and that was a
matter which required thinking out. At the same time I planned the
first attempt of my life to deal a secret blow at an enemy. It was
crude, but youth and inexperience must be my excuse.

Lionel Holland was training for a mile handicap, and I knew that in
the evening he used to go to the school sports ground, with a friend
to time him, and train till after dusk.

The track, half a mile in circumference, ran round the entire ground,
skirting the backs of houses, and bounded at one part for the length
of about a hundred yards by a hedge. I conceived the idea of throwing
him as he was running. The track was hard, and he might hurt himself
seriously or not at all. There was at any rate the chance of a full
retaliation.

I chose a spot about midway along the hedge opposite, where on the
inner side of the track, just upon the grass, and facing the cricket
pitch, was an iron seat firmly fixed to the ground.

One evening I followed Holland and his friend to the sports ground
and, having seen them go in, reached the back of the hedge by a
circuitous way. There was an aperture just large enough for me to
crawl through. I waited. In about ten minutes I heard his measured
stride on the hard asphalt. He passed me going at a good pace. As he
disappeared in the dusk I crept swiftly through the hedge, passed a
cord I had with me round the upper part of one of the legs of the iron
seat, and, holding both ends in my hand, crept back. In a few moments
he came round again. I pulled the cord as tight as I could. He
tripped, fell full length and lay still. I hauled in the cord and
stole away.

My sensations are worth analysing. At first I felt a certain elation
at having thrown an enemy. Then I experienced disappointment. What I
had done was somewhat pointless. Unless I had spoilt his looks—which
was hardly likely—I could not be said to have scored any advantage,
unless—I stopped, and my breath came quickly. Was it possible I had
killed him? I had heard of people dying from as slight a cause. I felt
terribly uncomfortable. I grew afraid of having the cord in my pocket.
I went swiftly home and burnt it, a small piece at a time, lest my
mother should come in and find it being destroyed. Afterwards I was
ashamed of my want of nerve. Even if he were dead nobody on earth
could connect me with the accident. I had always heard that murder
will out, but I was strong-minded enough, considering the
circumstances, to doubt whether it was possible in this case.

Anxious as I was to know the upshot of the affair I slept quite well
and started for school not a minute earlier than usual. I was in the
same class as Holland. When school began he had not arrived and
neither had the boy who was his time-keeper. Five minutes late the
latter walked in with a note in his hand.

“Holland has had an accident, sir.” He handed the note to the master.

“Indeed? I am sorry to hear that.” He opened the note and began to
read, his face growing more serious as he read on. “Concussion of the
brain! Mr. Holland does not quite seem to know how it happened.”

“It was on the cricket ground, sir. It had just got dusk and I was
timing Holland for the mile. The second time he did not come round, so
I went to see what had happened and found him lying on the path
insensible. I had to leave him there whilst I went for help.”

“Has he recovered consciousness?”

“Yes, sir.”

“How did it happen?”

“I can’t think. He must have tripped. The doctor says he is not to be
asked any questions and that he is to be kept quite quiet for the next
few days.”

“Quite so. I suppose you will be going round there, so you can let us
know how he is getting on.”

“Yes, sir.”

The boy went back to his seat. The class had been listening intently.
The master looked up and caught sight of my face.

“Why, Rank, you have turned quite pale.”

Everybody looked at me in surprise. The lack of friendliness between
Lionel Holland and myself was generally known, and it certainly
astonished them that I should have turned pale out of sympathy for
him.

He came back to school in about a fortnight looking none the worse for
his accident. He was as confident as before and as irritating to me as
ever.

I heard him explaining the incident in the playground afterwards.

“I’ll swear,” he was saying, “that something caught me just above the
ankle. I don’t see how I could possibly have tripped otherwise.”

“What could it have been?” asked Grainger, the boy who had been timing
him.

“I can’t think, I am sure, but I’m certain something tripped me up all
the same.”

“I expect you turned giddy,” said a member of the Lower Fourth.

“Giddy? Never was less giddy in my life;” and Holland turned a
withering glance upon the small boy that made him retire into the
background.

He had a way of twisting the arms of small boys, and holding their
elbows while he brought his knee sharply into contact with a soft but
sensitive part of their bodies, besides many other little devices for
making them wish it were possible to grow up suddenly into a strong
man with a strong fist.

I have always resented cruelty for cruelty’s sake, and petty
tormenting with no object in view has invariably impressed me as being
supremely silly. It is quite another matter when one is obliged to
take a strong step in support of a logical line of action. The end
must justify the means. The Jesuits are quite right. All around,
Nature teaches us the lesson. An infinite amount of apparent evil is
being done that good may come, and even if the end be not a
particularly elevated one that surely is a man’s own affair;
especially if he be prepared to pay the penalty of supporting his own
opinion with action which is against the moral sense of society in
general.

Sibella’s solicitude during Lionel Holland’s illness was an ample
revenge for the latter had he known it. It tortured me. At one time I
calculated my chances in a stand-up fight with him supposing I should
train for the event. I decided after careful thought that the odds
would be against me, and I had no intention of fighting for honour’s
sake with the prospect of leaving him more triumphant and complacent
than ever.



Chapter III

I was now sixteen and a half, and my mother had kept me at school much
longer than her means had warranted. I think that at one time she had
some idea that I might gain a scholarship and go to Oxford or
Cambridge, but my progress, though respectable, never suggested that I
might achieve honours. I think, as a matter of fact, that I could have
done so had I cared to, but I had no ambition to spend the best years
of early manhood in a torture chamber, and it is obvious that to a
youth of imagination, who has no means of joining in the recreations
of his fellows, and is expected to justify himself by brilliant
scholastic success, a career at the ’Varsity can be little else.

The question of my future was a very serious one. It was not possible
for my mother to pay anything towards giving me a profession, and
without influence the outlook was not hopeful.

Unknown to her I conceived the idea of writing to Gascoyne Gascoyne, a
distant cousin who was at the head of a large stockbroking firm. I
pointed out our relationship and asked if he could possibly find room
for me in his office. He replied in a type-written letter saying that
he had no knowledge of the relationship. He did not deny it, it might
be so, but at any rate he had no vacancies nor was he likely to have
any. It would therefore be of no use for Mr. Rank to trouble him
again.

I kept his letter, but I did not run the risk of a second rebuff from
any other member of the family.

Mr. Johnson came to the rescue. He had, it appeared, a great friend in
the City who employed two or three clerks and who had a vacancy. I was
interviewed, approved of, and engaged at the salary of fifteen
shillings a week. From circumstances which afterwards came to my
knowledge I believe that Mr. Johnson paid something in the way of a
premium. My mother was delighted. It was a start in life, and in her
eyes a good start was everything. Personally, I thought it a
deplorable beginning, and only took it because nothing better offered.
I was determined, however, not to stay longer than I could help.

With the best intentions in the world Mr. Johnson was quite incapable
of grasping my character. He talked to me of a youth of application, a
middle age of strenuous endeavour for a living wage, and an old age of
decent competence. The prospect appalled me. It sounded inexpressibly
gray. I gravitated towards wealth and luxury as the needle to a
magnet. I remember his saying:

“By the time you are thirty, Israel, you should be able to keep your
mother in this house and have it to yourselves.”

I had much ado to restrain a scornful laugh. By the time I was thirty
I was determined to have established my mother in a house fully ten
times the size.

I soon realised that the office I was in did not even afford a
starting point for a career, and could not be a recommendation to
anything better. I had no friends in the City of my own age. I
instinctively avoided those youths whom in the natural course of
events a person in my position would have associated with. The school
my mother had sent me to had put me out of sympathy with them,
and—what was more to the point—they could not be of any possible use
to me. I was bitterly envious of those boys who entered their
relations’ houses of business on advantageous terms, with sufficient
allowances and smart clothes. My poverty appeared to me extreme. I was
not in the first few months ever sufficiently in pocket to be able to
go to theatres and places of amusement as other young men did, and yet
I found myself with tastes equally expensive and with an abnormal love
of pleasure. Of my fifteen shillings a week I gave my mother eight,
and out of the remainder I was obliged to find my lunches and fares to
town and back, a condition of things that reduced me to chronic
discontent. I saw that the great point was to have rich friends and
make use of them. I also grasped the cardinal maxim that for success
in life it is essential to avoid the unlucky and the necessitous, and
above all not to be led away by the fact that in themselves the latter
are probably the most entertaining sections of society. If a man
wishes to be rich he must live among the rich, and how to do this on
fifteen shillings a week was the problem.

A Semitic appearance, however superior, is not the best recommendation
to society. In the Western it rouses instinctive antagonism. At the
same time, and because the laws of compensation are inevitable, it is
this antagonism that makes the Jew what he is. His powers of
resistance are automatically developed by it, and it encourages his
virility. The greater the odds a man has to fight the greater his
ultimate skill of fence. That man is fortunate who has the world
against him.

At sixteen and a half, however, my philosophy was not equal to the
annoyances of the situation. I wasted a great deal of valuable energy
in useless complaining. Sibella seemed lost to me for ever. Even had
she promised herself to me I should have placed no faith in her
staying power. I was quite sure that my humble start in life must have
brought home to her the difference in our positions as nothing in our
boy and girl relations had ever done. To Sibella, luxurious,
pleasure-loving and flippant, the junior clerk in a third-rate
business house was an altogether inferior and impossible person. The
shabbier I seemed, the smarter Lionel Holland must have appeared. He
was blossoming into a complete dandy, and had all the means at hand to
gratify his taste for fine clothes. I had spent a year under these
depressing conditions when I made a friend.

Godfrey Twyneham was the son of a rich man with whom our firm did a
certain amount of business. He was about eighteen months older than
myself, and there was nothing very remarkable about his personal
appearance except a pervading air of gentlemanliness. He had been
coming in and out of our office for twelve months before I realised
that he was inclined to take special notice of me. One morning as I
was on the way to my contemptible lunch he joined me. We walked a few
yards together, I painfully sure that he must be very anxious to be
rid of so shabby a companion. To my surprise, however, he asked me to
lunch with him. I was on the point of refusing, but he linked his arm
in mine in an altogether friendly and unpatronising manner, and I
yielded.

He had evidently taken a great fancy to me and insisted on my lunching
with him first about once a week, then twice a week, and finally every
day. He also insisted on my going to theatres with him, and grew quite
offended if we did not spend our Saturday evenings together. In vain I
protested—not very vehemently perhaps—that I could in no way make any
return. He laughed the idea to scorn. Why should I? We liked each
other. He was well off, I was not. That was a mere accident, and we
should be small-minded indeed if we allowed it to interfere with our
intimacy. He insisted on lending me money, declaring that I was sure
to make a fortune, and when that day came I could pay him back. He was
certainly the most generous person I have ever met, and, though I have
not paid him back, he has never mentioned the matter to me. I don’t
think he allowed the question of money to come between himself and his
friends. At the present moment he is in South America, and just before
the trial I received quite a heartbroken letter from him, declaring
his belief in my innocence, and in case I should need it, placing a
large sum of money at my disposal. Poor Godfrey! I suppose he forgot
that Earl Gascoyne is a rich man.

Before I met him I had all the inclination for pleasure and
indulgence, and his generosity had the effect of making me feel that I
could never again endure life unaccompanied by a certain amount of
excitement.

I was hopelessly unfitted by temperament for the dreary, sordid life
of shabby suburbanism that lay before me. I dwell upon these facts
because I think they may serve to show that I was impelled by all the
forces of my nature to make some attempt to rescue myself by decisive
action from the mire in which it seemed only too probable I was
destined to wade all my life. Godfrey Twyneham, with the best
intentions in the world, and from motives of purest friendship,
succeeded in making our house at Clapham appear ten degrees more
shabby and my position in the City infinitely more humiliating. He
introduced me to his tailor, bootmaker, and hosier, and lo! I found
myself well dressed. I dined at his father’s house in a decent dress
suit, and was introduced to a circle of his friends who gave me a very
good time indeed. The Twynehams lived at Highgate, and I constantly
spent Saturday to Monday with them. I think my mother missed me, but
she never complained and seemed only too glad that I was enjoying
myself. I was compelled to invent some plausible excuse for being able
to afford clothes so very superior to anything I had been accustomed
to. I explained that Godfrey Twyneham had been able to put me in the
way of some private business and that he had introduced me to his
tailor, it being necessary that I should be well dressed in order to
follow up my opportunity. Godfrey was one of those good-natured souls
with no such strict principles as prevented his telling a small fib to
oblige a friend. My mother and he took to each other at once, and it
flattered my vanity not a little that he seemed to like coming to us
and sharing my humble tenement bedroom apparently as much as I liked
visiting their luxurious house at Highgate.

I think the only occasion on which I was tactless enough to cause him
to disapprove of me was when I began to apologise for the poorness of
our household. I think I detected the faintest suspicion of a scornful
surprise in his face as he said:

“I don’t think those things matter, do you, except to snobs?”

The rebuke was severe, but it did me good and I avoided such mistakes
afterwards.

Even now I recall with pleasure the look of astonishment on Sibella’s
face the Sunday afternoon I called at the Hallwards’ in my new finery.
I felt that I had reason to be satisfied with myself. I knew that I
could do justice to my clothes and that I need not fear comparison
even with Lionel Holland. In fact, his smartness invariably had
something of the dressed up shop boy about it, while I had reason to
believe that in spite of my half Semitic origin I conveyed an
impression of distinction. At least, Godfrey told me so, and I knew he
was to be relied on in such matters. The drawing-room was full of
people when I entered, and Sibella said in a confidential tone of
approval:

“You do look smart, Israel. You will make Lionel quite jealous.”

Lionel Holland was also taken by surprise when he came in a few
minutes afterwards. Sibella, true to her character, and feeling that
Lionel had perhaps received enough encouragement of late,
ostentatiously permitted me to be her favoured cavalier for the
afternoon. She was unable to control her desire to set men at each
other’s throats. Had it been anyone else I should have managed her
properly and not permitted myself to be played fast and loose with.
Sibella, however, was the exception in my life, and she was always
drawing the unexpected from my character.

I heard her say to Lionel in a voice intended for me to hear:

“Doesn’t Israel look nice, Lionel?”

“He’s been robbing the till, I suppose.”

Sibella laughed a high, silvery laugh. The reply was sufficiently
spiteful and showed that she had succeeded in deepening an animosity
already bitter enough.

The sneer had truth, in that it suggested the disparity between my
apparel and my income, and consequently I hated Lionel Holland the
more.

Mr. Johnson might have proved a most awkward inquirer as to the
sources of my apparent prosperity, but just about this time he died.
He was found one morning sitting in his armchair, in front of a fire
which had burnt out hours before, dead, and clasped in his stiffening
fingers was a portrait of my mother in a little leather case. He had
evidently had it secretly copied, for she had not given it to him. He
had no relations, and the only person who appeared on the scene to
take charge of things was a local solicitor, who informed my mother
that she had inherited through her late lodger the sum of one thousand
pounds and all his personal effects. I think she was glad for my sake
as much as for her own.

“You see, Israel, with the house, which is our own, and a thousand
pounds properly invested in addition to what I have got, we can never
come absolutely to want, and if I can only get another lodger who will
pay well we should be quite comfortably off.”

The prospect failed to dazzle me. My ideas of what constituted comfort
grew daily. We discussed the manner of investing the thousand pounds
endlessly. My mother would not hear of anything but gilt-edged
securities, and would have been quite content with a miserable three
and a half per cent., whereas I declared it was a matter of no
difficulty to obtain a safe five or even six per cent. Before the
matter was decided my mother died and I found myself alone in the
world.

The event plunged me into the deepest dejection, for I had loved her
dearly. I took stock of my position and decided that whatever happened
I would resign my clerkship. My resignation was promptly followed by
the offer of a rise in salary, so potent a lever is independence to
progress in life. They were unable, however, to make me any such
proposal as tempted me to remain.

At first I made all sorts of good resolutions, which I might have kept
had not Godfrey Twyneham, whose advice was always practical, been
called away at this moment to South America. His father had a branch
of his business at Buenos Ayres and Godfrey was destined to manage it,
the control of the London house being reserved for the eldest son. He
was anxious for me to accompany him and even went to considerable
trouble in finding a post for me. I could not, however, bring myself
to give up Sibella and at the last moment declined to go. Poor
Godfrey! I don’t think he ever quite forgave me, and since then we
have not seen much of each other.

My fifteen hundred pounds soon began to dwindle. From day to day I
salved my conscience by assuring myself that, though I was spending my
capital, I was making friends who could not fail to be useful to me.
Inwardly I knew perfectly well that the class of young men I was
mixing with could never help me to a livelihood. I shut up the house
at Clapham and took rooms near Piccadilly, and eighteen months of my
life were wasted in unprofitable lounging. I seldom rose till late,
and when I was dressed strolled round to a luxurious bar near Bond
Street to meet several boon companions and spend the afternoon in
tippling. In the evening I frequented those theatres at which the more
frivolous pieces were played, and afterwards hung about the stage
doors. I soon found myself led into extravagances in the way of little
suppers and small presents of jewellery, which made my capital
disappear at an alarming rate. Like countless other young men before
me, and no doubt since, I was unable to pull up, although I could feel
my financial bark throbbing with impending disaster and could hear the
roar of the rapids growing nearer and nearer. I shut my eyes and went
ahead, hoping for a miracle. Somehow I obtained a reputation for
riches for which there were no reasonable grounds. I managed to hold
on for a year at high pressure, then for another six months with
difficulty, living on the credit that twelve months’ ostentatious
solvency had secured me. Then ensued a few months of decline, and on
the morning of my twenty-third birthday I found myself heavily in debt
and penniless. A few borrowed fivers kept me afloat for a short time
and then Lionel Holland put a spoke in my wheel and sent me headlong.
I had been asked to a supper given by a friend of mine who had just
come of age. He had partaken frequently of my hospitality in my
prosperous days, and, having some sense of gratitude, had not omitted
me on this important occasion.

To my annoyance, I found that Lionel Holland, with whom I did not know
my friend was acquainted, was of the party. We welcomed each other
with outward civility, but I saw danger in his eye.

The supper passed off pleasantly enough, and afterwards we took
hansoms and drove to my friend’s rooms. I escorted a chorus-girl from
the Frivolity, a particular friend of mine, with whom I was making
desperate attempts to keep on terms of intimacy. Our hansom broke
down, and my little friend, nervous and hysterical, fainted. I carried
her into the vestibule of a well-known club, where, with the aid of
brandy, she was brought round, and after ten minutes or so declared
that she had no intention of going home, but asked me to take her on
to join the others. We found them wondering what had happened to us,
and in the excitement of detailing the scene I did not notice that the
manner of the others had perceptibly changed towards me. As soon as I
detected a certain coolness I realised that Lionel Holland had been
saying something to my detriment. The women were especially distant,
and I know no class who can make a man feel so unpleasantly that he is
not wanted as the sort of female whom my host was entertaining. They
have a genius for being cruel to anyone who is going under, and after
all, it is not to be wondered at. They themselves have risked too much
to care about increasing the odds. In such a mood, however, they are
dangerous, for no considerations of breeding restrain them. My own
particular friend was taken out of the room by one of the other women,
and on her return I could see at once that she had had repeated to her
whatever Lionel Holland had said. Her manner became suddenly insolent
and aggressive, as if she felt that it was she who had been wronged.
Inwardly I quaked, for I knew what she was capable of.

She had taken more wine than was good for her, and was by no means
mistress of herself.

As usual, I was in charge of the piano, playing accompaniments for
anyone who would contribute a song and filling in myself with snatches
of music hall ditties, or florid pianoforte arrangements of the most
popular tunes of the day.

I had even successfully accompanied Lionel Holland, who had rather a
nice voice, and had managed with great skill and tact to put him in
high good humour with his performance. I was nervously conscious that
it was necessary for my own dignity to make the evening pass off
smoothly.

My little friend was then pressed to sing, and I hastened to join in
the request. Though she had an exceedingly pretty voice she was one of
those people who become vocally helpless if in any way under the
influence of alcohol. Her voice sounded weak and tremulous; she was
unable to keep to the right key, and, feeling that she was making an
exhibition of herself, lost her temper more and more at every bar. In
an absolute panic I did everything I could in order that her song
should pass off successfully, but to no purpose. She forgot her words,
and I ventured to prompt her, which seemed to irritate her the more.
To make matters worse the others laughed.

Suddenly she stopped and laughed too, an unpleasant laugh with little
mirth in it.

“He’s a nice pianist, isn’t he? He’d be more at home blacking the
lodger’s boots, instead of pretending to be a gentleman on his
mother’s hard earned savings.”

She herself was a plumber’s daughter, but in her case that was not to
the point.

With commendable presence of mind I pretended not to hear, and
commenced to play something loudly on the piano.

She was, however, transported with rage at her own failure and
determined to make somebody pay.

She shut the lid of the piano down violently, and I only just managed
to save my hands from being crushed. To such a female, in such a
condition, it is not a long way to hysterics.

“Get back to the lodgers!” she screamed. “What do you mean by coming
here and pretending to be a gentleman? You ought to be horsewhipped.
You——” Here followed a string of epithets intensely humiliating to
have to listen to under the circumstances. The other ladies present
proceeded to take her part and to treat her as a highly injured
female. They crowded round her as she lay sobbing and gurgling and
swearing on the sofa, and deluged her with sympathy.

“I really don’t wonder at her being upset,” said one.

“Such a thing to find out. Enough to make her feel small,” protested
another.

“It is indeed,” said a third, and turning to me added with a comic
attempt at hauteur, “You cad!”

I felt terribly uncomfortable. I quite saw the sort of character
Lionel Holland had been kind enough to give me. I felt like breaking a
champagne bottle over his head, only it would have done no good, and
vengeance should always bide its time if it is to be effective.

He too looked uncomfortable, as if he had not expected the mean part
he had played to be brought home to him so obviously and so soon.

As my presence seemed to make the lady grow worse every moment I
suggested that I should go. My host, a youth with every instinct of
good breeding, would not hear of it, but several of the other men were
growing a little tired of the scene. They had only met me in such
society as we were now in and it did not matter to them what my origin
was. They would not be called upon to recognise me in a legitimate
social way.

“Good-night, your lordship,” said one of the women mockingly, as I
left the room.

It was no haphazard gibe. Obviously Holland, in order to heap further
discredit upon me, had revived the boast of my schoolboy days. I went
up to him before I left the house and said quite quietly, so that no
one else could hear:

“You will be very sorry for this, and I want to assure you of the
fact.”

I cannot describe the intense conviction I managed to throw into the
words. I felt they would come true. He tried to laugh scornfully but
the failure died upon his lips. He was frightened in spite of himself.



Chapter IV

The next morning I had a stormy interview with my landlord. He would
wait no longer for the arrears of rent. He gave me three days to pay
or to find other rooms. In the meantime he would detain my things. My
little skiff had decidedly reached the rocks.

I went down to the house at Clapham, which I had failed to let. The
blinds were drawn and a weather-beaten notice board leant in an
intoxicated manner over the shabby railings. I had not been near it
for months, and as I opened the front door the place smelt damp and
reminded me with a shiver of the deaths that had taken place there. I
almost heard the whisper of my mother’s voice in my ear.

Curiously enough, I had made no attempt to sell the furniture. I
seemed to have had a premonition that the house would yet be a home
for me. I went over it, drawing up the blinds and letting in the
dreary February light. Every now and then I paused and listened. I
seemed to hear someone moving about the house. The garden, which had
been my mother’s hobby, was in a most desolate condition, and a dead
and decomposing cat lay across the threshold of the back door. The
atmosphere of the whole place seemed tuned to the key of my own
depression, and I must admit to sitting down in the forlorn parlour
and shedding tears. Even the most self-reliant character must resent
being absolutely alone in the world, and I felt terribly alone. I
suppose those who have listened amazed to the story of what they are
pleased to call my crimes would scarcely believe that I have a craving
for sympathy. True, it must be sympathy on my own terms, but I crave
for it. Personally I do not at present ask for pity, but were the
comfortable classes given to psychological analysis—which they are
not—it might astonish them to discover in how little they differ from
the practised enemy of society, the criminal. Many a highly respected
member of society whom prosperity has prevented from feeling the
incentive of crime is a criminal in embryo. For myself, I have
achieved my object; I shall die Earl Gascoyne, and my child will bear
the title after me. My descendants will belong to the ruling classes,
and I shall be handed down to posterity as an interesting study. The
British snob never wholly deserts a lord, and will consider the
scaffold to be not a little honoured by my patronage. I am sure that
there are thousands of worthy people who would sooner the whole matter
had been hushed up; I for one am of their opinion. I could have
dispensed with a niche in history between Gille de Rais and Madame de
Brinvilliers. The fame of posterity always asks too heavy a penalty in
this life.

I realised that I should have to do the work of the house at Clapham
myself, so I decided to lock up all the rooms except the sitting-room,
a bedroom, and the kitchen.

I engaged a woman to come in for the first few days and light fires
and clean up. Then, handing her the key, I returned to town.

I owed over sixty pounds at my lodgings which I had not the least
prospect of paying. I had my landlord’s word for it that he would not
allow a thing of mine to be moved out until my debt was discharged. I
had no mind to lose my stock of wearing apparel, which constituted a
very valuable asset. Removing my things during the night would be a
very difficult business, and the slightest noise would rouse the
people of the house and prevent my ever getting them out at all. I
walked about the whole afternoon thinking the matter over and evolving
one scheme after another, only to throw them all aside as
impracticable. My chambers were on the second floor, which increased
the difficulty. The only possible thing was to bring my clothes down
loose and put them in a four-wheeled cab and then to remove my
travelling bags empty. To carry down heavy luggage would have been
impossible. I secured a four-wheeler and conceived the idea of telling
the driver exactly what I was about to do, promising him a sovereign
if he would help me. Never was money better spent.

I told my landlord to call me early as I had a certainty of obtaining
a hundred pounds in the morning. So cheerful and optimistic was my
manner that I am sure he was deceived, for he executed my order for a
chop with alacrity. At about eleven I went to bed and, ringing my
bell, asked for some whisky and hot water. This was in order that the
servant might report that I had retired for the night. Three o’clock
was the time my cabman was to make his appearance, and at half-past
two I rose, dressed, and looked out of the window. There he was, and
the street was clear of policemen.

I put on my fur coat and, carrying as many things as possible, crept
downstairs. In an incredibly short space of time I had placed my first
instalment in the cab. Half a dozen times I crept upstairs and down
again, with my heart in my mouth, till my belongings were bursting
from both windows of the cab. To my infinite delight, I rescued
everything, down to my boot-trees. There was hardly room for me in the
cab, but I managed to squeeze in and we drove away. Robinson Crusoe
returning to the island with his raft covered with useful articles
from the wreck was not half so elated. We trundled away to Clapham,
and at about four in the morning I had my belongings safe and sound in
my own house. Their loss would have been a terrible blow, and as I
retired to rest I breathed a sigh of gratitude. My landlord would, I
suppose, declare that he is revenged, now that he has had the felicity
of reading how an unfeeling judge gave me certain details as to the
way in which the law proposed to deal with me. The death sentence has
always sounded to me a most undignified and vindictive snarl. I have
most certainly never been impressed by it, and never less so than when
I was directly interested in its pronouncement.

It was very clear that I was now called upon to earn my own living. I
did not doubt my ability to earn enough to keep me, but I shuddered at
the prospect of days of hopeless drudgery in the City that other men
might grow rich. For eighteen months I had lived in comparative
luxury. I was spoilt for playing the part of a slave. Five times the
salary I was ever likely to obtain seemed to me mere poverty. I
strolled about the City day after day for some weeks without any
definite result, and the very few pounds I had managed to scrape
together were disappearing fast.

Grahame Hallward was now in the City and as friendly to me as ever. He
would, I was sure, lend me money if I asked him, but a very natural
feeling prevented my exposing my parlous condition to Sibella’s
brother. In fact, I did everything possible to give him the impression
that I was prosperous. Sometimes he would come in during the evening
and smoke with me, and I invariably kept from him the truth that I did
the housework myself, complaining bitterly of the incompetence of the
imaginary female who came in to cook and put things straight for me.
There was only one person from whom I could borrow money, and I felt a
very natural diffidence in writing to Godfrey after the way I had
treated him. Shipwreck, however, was too imminent for such scruples to
prevail, and in reply to my request the kind-hearted fellow sent me
twenty-five pounds, saying that I was on no account to allow pride to
stand in the way of asking for more. As to my not having fallen in
with his views, surely I had a right to manage my affairs my own way.

When alone in the evenings I used to draw out the genealogical tree of
the Gascoynes and study it. Whilst living in London I had made a good
many inquiries and had found out exactly where I stood. That is to
say, I had collected a great deal of information as to the habits,
health, and chances of longevity of the members of the different
branches that stood between me and the succession. The table I have
already given had not altered materially. The Earl at that time was
twenty-three years of age, holding a commission in the Guards, and had
been married some months before to an American heiress. They might
have any number of children, so that it was strange that, though I was
in no way lacking in common sense, I should persist in dreaming of
myself as finally attaining the rank of Earl Gascoyne.

It was at this time I came across a book which interested me
exceedingly. It was a record of most of the celebrated poisoning cases
in history, but the author had the gift of vivifying whatever he
touched with rare qualities of imagination. He was able to fill in the
bare outlines left by mere chroniclers with an atmosphere which
carried singular conviction, and he could weave a tale of interest
from the most meagre details. Given the crime and the historical
characters, he followed them all through the different emotions which
led up to the catastrophe with faultless instinct. He possessed a
breadth of mind in dealing with assassins which was unusual, and
pointed out that great criminals are as a rule so far removed from
other men that it is presumption to measure them by the same standard.
The courage and fortitude with which they almost invariably face
death, he cited as a proof that probably most of them had reached a
philosophic elevation of which they themselves were perhaps
unconscious, and from which death hardly seemed so terrible an event.
He was not interested in the commonplace criminal. The Borgias, Madame
de Brinvilliers, the Earl of Somerset, and Thomas Henry Wainwright,
were the aristocrats in crime who roused his curiosity and seemed to
him worthy of psychological analysis. A criminal in his eyes might be
great, just as any other man might be great who lifted his profession
out of the common rut by the magic of personality. He deprecated, for
instance, the unreflective execration which historians pour out on
those who have removed Kings and Emperors. Most of them, he held, were
men who had everything to lose and nothing to gain by their act. They
could look for no immunity. Ravaillac, torn to pieces by horses,
Gerard, tortured to death for having done what he considered his duty
in removing William the Silent, seemed to him to have missed their
share of commendation. More dignified a hundredfold they seemed to him
than the egotistical apes who sat in a mockery of the judicial mind in
judgment on Charles I. For the latter at least there was every chance
of escape and no personal courage was required.

Not that he had anything to say in actual defence of secret poisoners.
If they chose such a line of conduct, they must not grumble when the
day of reckoning came. At the same time, he paid all deference to
their courage, for the risks of murder are always enormous. I cannot
say when first the book began to exercise an influence over me, and to
turn my mind in a certain direction, but as I grew more and more
depressed with my failure to obtain a means of livelihood, an idea
gradually formed itself which, though I dismissed it with a laugh at
first, returned again and again, assuming more and more of a permanent
character each time.

The loneliness of my life, for with the exception of visits from
Grahame Hallward my days were solitary, encouraged morbid reflections.
At first I entertained the idea as an abstraction. I clothed the
Gascoyne family and myself in fifteenth-century garb, and placed the
scene in a medieval Italian city. I wove plot and counterplot. One by
one I removed them all from my path, and till the end walked
unsuspected, doing my work with caution and precision.

Each day I had a new set of subsidiary characters whom I moved hither
and thither according to the exigencies of my mimic conspiracy. The
game became a mania with me. I read every book I could discover that
had to do with secret crimes.

For a while I walked with the grim shadows of the past and would have
no companion but the shades of murderers. Cæsar Borgia whispered in my
ear as we paced the gardens of the Vatican, and the scarlet bow of his
mouth twisted sardonically when he told me in a low, musical voice of
how Giuseppe died.

Lucrezia intoned as in a trance her secret deeds, telling me how she
had killed her boy husband and taken her brother for a lover.

I bore Nero’s cup of poison to his victims and watched their vain
efforts to grapple with unconquerable agony, or their final look of
terror as the growing paralysis of death crept over them. There was in
the long list of poisoners, ancient and modern, a French abbé who in
particular interested me. His crimes had been uniformly successful,
for he had discovered a drug which left no trace, but a gradual terror
took possession of him and, though unsuspected, he confessed his
guilt.

Recorded poisoners have necessarily been the clumsiest. To be detected
is to confess oneself unskilled. Pretty, dainty Madeline Smith,
sitting imperturbable and charming through the long days of her trial,
must have reflected that the thing could have been better done and
that eighteen is a little young to begin.

Madame de Brinvilliers and the French poisoners in the reign of Louis
XIV. were fascinating. The crime drew a meretricious charm from the
daintiness of the period, even if the punishments were barbaric. It
was certainly unlike the porcelain manners of the time to break a
lady, an aristocrat, on the wheel.



Chapter V

One day it struck me that I had never seen Hammerton, the magnificent
Hampshire home of the Gascoynes. It was the most important of the
half-dozen places that went with the title, and I wondered that so far
curiosity had not impelled me to visit any of them.

I made up my mind to see them all, beginning with Hammerton; and so,
one exquisite day in June, I got on my bicycle early in the morning
and rode out of London. The bicycle probably strikes a jarring note in
the telling, but I have no doubt that their emblazoned chariots,
caparisoned horses, and luxurious barges, were to my great prototypes
as little romantic.

As I rode along the level Roman road, the only figure in sight, I felt
a great exhilaration. I was the adventurer setting forth, the hero of
the story going to claim his own. The towers of Hammerton rose ever
like a mirage on the horizon, and once or twice I was obliged to check
myself, so far had my fancy roamed. I reflected seriously that my
plans, if romantic in the after telling, should be practical in
execution, and that it must be left to the poet and dramatist to mould
them to poetic fancy. I doubted not that I should at least achieve a
name worthy of their notice. Romance, however, was my master, as it
must ever be of the imaginative. She is the mistress of the secret
ways, and the touch of her finger-tips is superior to the very lips of
my Lady Commonplace.

I breakfasted at a wayside inn, my table set in a garden which was a
melody of roses, while beyond, on fields and pasture-land, the growing
sun drank up the morning mists. By the time I was on the road again
the day had become tropical and I was fain to ride easily.

I had chosen, for an excellent reason, apart from a human weakness for
fair weather, a fine day and a Saturday. Hammerton was a noted show
place and on such a day there was likely to be a considerable number
of visitors, and I should most probably not be noticed by the person
whose duty it was to take the visiting parties round.

Hammerton lay some way from the main road and some thirty-five miles
from London. I struck off into narrow lanes where the trees arched
overhead and the sun streaming through their branches made lacework of
the shadows beneath. An intense stillness lay about these bypaths, and
it was but rarely I passed anyone. Here and there I saw little patches
of red, violet, or white in front of me which when I overtook them
turned out to be cottagers’ children, and invariably there was a
thatched dwelling near nestling by the road. I was too entirely town
bred to be able to identify the countless species of birds that piped
and warbled as I rode among them.

At last, after having descended a steep lane where the ground was so
broken as to make riding impossible, I began to ascend, and finally
emerged on the brow of a hill and on to another high road. Some three
miles off, crowning another hill which was a mixture of rock and grass
land, stood Hammerton Castle, lordly and feudal. At the foot of the
hill on which it was built a river wound its way through the
pasture-land, and, about its base, nestling beneath its shadow as if
for protection, clustered the little township of Hammerton, red-roofed
and mellow. I looked at my watch. It was barely twelve o’clock, so I
went into an adjacent field and lay down in the grass, amidst
buttercups and daisies, and from the shadow of a great elm surveyed
the home of my ancestors at leisure.

It was indeed a noble dwelling. The glamour of a great past was about
it. Its majestic proportions and lordly turrets told of traditions
which were little less than royal.

It was from these walls that a Gascoyne had flung defiance at King
John, following it by so stout a defence that that amiable monarch had
been compelled to pass on gnashing his teeth, only to meet his
rebellious Barons at Runnymede.

A Gascoyne had held Hammerton for Edward of York. It had been a
favourite with Queen Elizabeth, whose condescension had impoverished a
couple of generations. Later, it had stood a siege from one of
Cromwell’s generals, and so stubborn had been the defence that the
only military tyrant England has ever known hastened to its reduction,
and was after all compelled to grant an honourable capitulation. Even
now as I lay and dreamed in the morning sunlight I could see the
shattered garrison emerging from those gates, drums beating, colours
flying, while the Puritans, who never had a chivalrous word for their
foes, looked sourly on.

I lay gazing over the intervening landscape at the castle till well on
into the afternoon. I wove it and its surroundings into one day dream
after another.

It was four o’clock when I arrived at the main entrance and stood with
a small group of excursionists waiting for a guide. The great gates
opened on to level lawns, and, large as the castle looked from
without, I was amazed at the space of ground its circular and
battlemented walls enclosed, even though it was broken up by
buildings, some of them quite modern. I stepped after the guide with a
distinct feeling of pride in the knowledge that even if far removed I
was in the line of succession to all this magnificence. There was
among us the usual historical authority who kept on stopping the guide
to ask him some irrelevant question. The latter, however, had a very
effectual manner of dealing with such tactics, and always began the
particular description he was engaged on all over again. We were shown
the spot where Lord Gascoyne, hero of the memorable defence against
Cromwell, fell mortally wounded. In the banqueting hall there was a
superb collection of armour, which included a coat of mail worn by
Richard, the Lion Heart, and the sword used by Henry at Agincourt. It
was the picture gallery, however, which interested me most, and I had
barely scanned half a dozen Lelys, Reynolds and Gainsboroughs, before
I saw how entirely my mother had been a Gascoyne.

She might have sat for the portrait of the celebrated Anne, Countess
of Gascoyne, whose picture occupied the post of honour. My mother had
possessed the same curiously deep blue eyes. The nose, just a little
too large, was identical, as were the oval of the face and the turn of
the head. I lingered behind the others to look at this picture more
closely, and when finally I tore myself away I found the guide droning
over the description of the most remarkable portrait in the gallery.

It was true that most of the Gascoynes were dark, but Ethel, the sixth
Earl, was more like a Southern Italian than an Englishman. The name
sounded curious as belonging to a man. He must have had singularly
fine eyes, and yet the painter, with rare perception, had painted them
half closed. To have done otherwise would have been obviously wrong.
There was not a feature or a point in the portrait which did not
suggest subtlety. Since that day I have often sat and gazed at the
picture. It has a fascination for me which never palls. I intended to
have had my own hung by the side of it. Indeed, I have left orders for
a portrait to be done.

In common with most people who walk their way in secret he had
apparently a love of green, for though the picture is slightly
disturbed by a note of scarlet, in this again the artist showed rare
judgment. He had rightly felt that the composition, to be
characteristic, required it. The figure in the picture wears emerald
earrings, and his sword, belt, and boots are embroidered with jewels.
The guide book tells us that he secured the title by treachery. He was
more than suspected of poisoning his eldest brother, and was known to
have killed in a duel another brother who stood between himself and
the earldom. He spent, so the guide told us, a great deal of his life
in Italy, where his doings were reported to have been of unfathomable
infamy. Late in life, long after the period of the emerald earrings,
he returned to Hammerton, and if his youth had been prodigal he
compensated for it by a penurious old age. He shut himself up in a
tower and left the remainder of the castle to go to rack and ruin. He
had one companion, reputed to be an Italian magician. The countryside
told awful tales of the secret rites and horrors practised by these
two, and the guide-book mentioned a village maiden spirited away by
supernatural means and compelled to bear them company against her
will. True, another chronicler of the time confidently asserted that
the self-same maiden was afterwards seen in a neighbouring town in
very undesirable company, but this latter historian was a Gascoyne and
obviously biassed.

I was in dread lest a most extraordinary coincidence should strike the
guide or the excursionists. I at once noted the great likeness between
the portrait and myself. The features were Jewish and so were mine.
This was the more curious because in this respect we had no common
ancestor. He must have been about my build and height, and the eyes
seemed to meet mine with a slightly mocking smile of recognition and a
subtle under-glance of sympathy.

I do not know whether the picture is all I fancy it to be, or whether
my imagination, fired by its likeness to myself, gives it its
atmosphere, but to me it is extraordinarily suggestive. Whenever I
look upon it the life of this exquisite passes through my brain like a
painted procession. He was obviously one of those born to the worship
of beautiful apparitions, and his life had been passed at the extremes
of joy and bitterness which that apparently exoteric, but in reality
deeply esoteric, cult involves. It was a face that could never have
known the lethargy of mediocrity. When his spirit slumbered it must
have been the sleep of satiety. I am glad I never saw a picture of him
in old age. That face, stained with the vices of an intoxicating youth
and torn by the humiliation and agonies of middle and old age, could
not have been pleasant. I am convinced that there were no
looking-glasses in that solitary tower where he and his mysterious
friend died and were only found when the rats had half eaten them.

But to me the great point was that he was impatient of dullness, and
had stretched out his hand to take what he wanted. The guide-book said
he was without natural affection. How little the world understands
men! As if an egotist of character might not slay the mother he loved
for a dear purpose.

Morally, Ethel, Earl Gascoyne, was a matricide, the family chronicles
deponing that his mother had died of grief at his crimes. He could not
have been entirely destitute of natural affection, for he was
apparently overwhelmed with sorrow at her death, as the inscription on
the stately tomb which he erected to her memory in Hammerton chapel
indicated.

I wandered after the gaping, chattering group hardly hearing what was
said. How was it that I was so like this Gascoyne who was so
singularly unlike his kinsmen, and who had put into practice the
dreams I had dreamt? He had been right. Hammerton had been worth
risking something for.

We visited the lonely tower where he was supposed to have spent the
haunted evening of his days in searching for the elixir of life, and
where the rats had left him a hideous, obscene corpse. The trippers
seemed infected by the gloom of the story, for in silence they tramped
through the spacious, echoing, upper chamber, where he was reputed to
have studied the stars, and to have sold himself to the Evil One.

This old man who found it so difficult to die—he was nearly a hundred
when the end came—spent his last years in a debauch of mystical
speculation, remaining interesting to the end.

As we crossed the grassy lawn on our way out a carriage and pair drove
in through the great gates. It in were seated a young man and woman of
a surprising distinction of appearance. The young man was dark, but
not as Ethel, Earl Gascoyne, had been dark. The hair, eyes and
moustache were dark brown. The face itself was almost feminine in its
delicacy of colouring. The flush of the cheeks and the redness of the
lips might have been envied by a young girl. The suggestion of
effeminacy, however, was negatived by the iron determination of the
mouth. I don’t think I have ever seen so firm a face which did not
suggest obstinacy. The eyes were keen, and looked out from beneath the
finely pencilled eyebrows with a winning expression of kindliness. The
face, however, was too sensitive to be designated by so stodgy an
expression as good-natured.

The guide touched his cap, and turning to the group who stood waiting,
said impressively: “That is his lordship.”

The excursionists gaped after the carriage as if my lord and my lady
were a show.

I rode back to London in the cool of a perfect summer evening thinking
deeply. I had seen enough of the world to be quite sure that luck or
capital were the only two things which could bring wealth while a man
was still young enough to enjoy it. The first could in the nature of
things only come to one man in a thousand, and the chances of a stroke
of luck really worth having were even more remote. As for capital, I
had none, nor was there the least probability of my obtaining any.
Therefore, unless I was content to work hard to make some other man
rich I must step out of the conventional path.

I was unknown to all my aristocratic relatives. Should mine be the
unseen hand which was to remove them from my path? And if so, was such
a thing possible without risks disproportionate to the gain? It was a
stupendous enterprise. The career of a murderer was not to be
undertaken lightly and without reflection. The more I thought about
it, however, the more convinced I became that I should decide on
making a struggle for the Gascoyne title and the Gascoyne millions.

After all, the family was nothing to me. The member of it to whom I
had appealed for assistance had refused even to see me, and should I
persist in my design this would have been as well.

From the study of poisoners I proceeded to the study of poisons, and
in this way I spent the remainder of the summer.



Chapter VI

With the help of Grahame Hallward and a strict economy of the money
which Godfrey Twyneham had sent me I managed to get through the summer
fairly comfortably. I visited the West End but rarely, and was spared
the indignity of being cut by my former acquaintances.

I gathered from what Grahame Hallward let fall that Lionel Holland had
given him an idea of the humiliation I had undergone in his presence.
Grahame was much too chivalrous and sweet-natured to wound my feelings
by any direct allusion to it; I doubt, indeed, if he realised that he
had ever given me a hint of his knowledge.

Sibella had no chivalry, and when I called could not forbear to make
pointed allusion to people who passed themselves off for being what
they were not. Again I left the house hating her, and still my dreams
were tormented by thoughts of her.

By the autumn I had quite made up my mind that I would try and clear
my path to the Gascoyne earldom. I tabulated the lives it would be
necessary to remove. They were as follows:

    Simeon, Earl Gascoyne, aged 25
    Ughtred Gascoyne,        "  55
    Henry Gascoyne,          "  62
    Gascoyne Gascoyne,       "  68
    Gascoyne Gascoyne,       "  27
    Henry Gascoyne,          "  22
    Edith Gascoyne,          "  23
    Henry Gascoyne,          "  89

It was strange that there were not more women, and it was somewhat of
a relief. The killing of women is not a pleasant task, believe me. I
have learnt so much from experience. The great question was, where to
begin. The old gentleman of eighty-nine might be left out of the
reckoning. It was highly probable that by the time I brought my
operations to a conclusion, he would be beyond the need for attention.

I debated with myself the alternatives of beginning near the head of
the house, or with those members who were furthest removed. After much
reflection I decided that it would be better to begin where there was
likely to be the least suspicion of foul play.

Gascoyne Gascoyne was the son of the man who had snubbed me so
unmercifully when I applied to him for introductions. He was
twenty-seven years of age, and I had absolutely no knowledge of him
beyond that fact. I knew that his father was on the Stock Exchange,
and the Red Book told me that he lived in a house at South Kensington.
I wandered about in its vicinity for several evenings and gathered
that young Gascoyne lived at home with his father and mother. It was
hardly likely that the young man who came home every evening at the
same time and only went out again at irregular intervals would be
other than the son of the house, and I was assured that he was the man
I was looking for by his entering a carriage one evening with the
master and mistress of the house and being addressed by them as
Gascoyne. The time had come to formulate a plan of campaign, and I
went home and shut myself up with French cigarettes to think.

My study of poisons had been profoundly unproductive of suggestion.
The vast majority of them were thrown aside as ridiculous. To use them
would have been suicidal. Corrosives, for instance, with their obvious
evidences, could never be employed except by the most thoughtless and
ignorant. I even disliked reading about their symptoms. I would
certainly as soon have dashed out the brains of my victim with a
sledge-hammer.

True, there are, I believe, on record cases where poisoning by arsenic
had passed undetected, but it was far too slow a medium; I might not
always have sufficient time at my command. I studied the irritants
with an equal feeling of dissatisfaction, and the neurotics filled me
with a sense of the hopelessness of the task I had undertaken. I was
firmly convinced that there must be a poison somewhere in which the
chances of detection were infinitesimal. Copper, and the possibility
of its being administered so that its presence in food might appear
accidental, detained me some time and cost me a great deal of thought,
but how to manage it was not very apparent. At any rate, I mentally
registered the idea; I was determined that on no account would I
commit anything to paper. I have at all times considered the
carelessness of criminals in this respect most curious. I reflected
that it would be an excellent thing to devote so much time every
evening to a retrospect of the day’s work and if possible to destroy
all evidences as I went along.

My sinister resolution had been taken so imperceptibly that I found
myself engrossed with the details before I was quite aware of how far
I had travelled in the matter.

About this time I picked up a book on reincarnation, and I began to
wonder if after all I might not be Ethel, Lord Gascoyne, come again.
In default of being able to prove the contrary I came to the
conclusion that I was. The fancy pleased me and I would indulge it.

In my search for a good medium I was confronted with the fact that the
secrets of the best poisoners have died with them. Confession does not
recommend itself to the strongest intellects even when _in extremis_.
Now and then of course the vanity of a great artist has led to
inconvenient death-bed boasting, as in the case of Philippe Darville,
who, imagining himself about to die, gave an exhaustive and
circumstantial account of his crimes, and recovering, was brought to
the block, only his sense of humour supporting him through the trying
development.

I continued my search for the medium I wanted, and in the meanwhile
made myself thoroughly acquainted with the habits of young Gascoyne
Gascoyne.

In appearance he was tall and athletic, and his character seemed to be
that of most young men about town with natural instincts and without
too much imagination. He patronised the lighter forms of theatrical
entertainment, and I recognised him as having been one of the habitués
of the Frivolity Theatre. Further inquiry elicited the fact that he
was being assisted to sow his wild oats by a young lady of the chorus
with a snub nose and with that in her which can only be described as
“devil.” She appeared to be genuinely in love with him and had proved
it by declining to allow him to marry her—an offer he had made in the
first days of their acquaintance. He was busily employed in the City
all day, and, being an only son, his parents seemed to expect more
attention from him than would otherwise have been the case. The house
they lived in had gardens at the back which opened on to a quiet road.
Having no very clear conception as to how I was going to act I derived
a certain satisfaction from hanging about this road, and was surprised
one night by almost running up against young Gascoyne Gascoyne as he
emerged from a private gate which he locked behind him with a
pass-key. I watched him walk swiftly into the thoroughfare, hail a cab
and drive away. It was barely eleven o’clock, and when I returned and
looked at the house all the lights in the lower windows were out.
That, however, in what I had by observation gathered to be his bedroom
was alight. Evidently he was not sufficiently emancipated from
parental control to go his own way openly, or his secrecy was due to
consideration for his parents’ feelings.

I ascertained that as a rule when he spent the evening at home he left
the house as soon as his parents were in bed, and if in time called at
the theatre and drove his infatuation home. Sometimes he did not
return to South Kensington till daybreak. It seemed such a daring
proceeding that at times I wondered if his father might not be
cognisant of it. The girl’s name was Kate Falconer. I don’t suppose it
was her real name, but as such she figured with a couple of dozen
others at the bottom of the play bill.

Since her attachment to young Gascoyne she had dispensed with the
attentions of all her other admirers. I was sorry for her, as it meant
that she was wasting time. She lived in a flat in Bloomsbury, three
floors up, and once her front door was shut she was as secure from any
observation as if she had been living in the moon.

The problem was a difficult one. It was essential that I should not be
acquainted with either of them. Put brutally, the task I had set
myself was how to poison a man to whom I was a perfect stranger, and
to whose food-supply I had absolutely no means of access.

Whichever way I looked at the matter I was forced to the conclusion
that there could be no success without a certain amount of risk, and I
had not yet accustomed myself to the idea of risk. It seemed
inevitable that I must make myself acquainted with young Gascoyne
somehow or other, but I left this as a last resource, and I am glad I
did so, for fate assisted me in a most remarkable manner.

One Sunday afternoon I found myself wandering in the neighbourhood of
the Bloomsbury flats where Kate Falconer lived. I had become so
tenacious of my purpose that whilst thinking out some definite scheme
I enjoyed feeling that I was in the vicinity of my intended victim. I
knew that as a rule he spent Sunday afternoon at the flat. A sudden
curiosity impelled me to enter the building, and, passing the
hall-porter as if I had business, I climbed to the top. It seemed
likely to have been an aimless proceeding, but as I was descending I
heard Miss Falconer’s door open on the landing just above me, and
recognised her voice in conversation with young Gascoyne.

“I shan’t see you till next Saturday then?”

“I’m afraid not; my father and mother will want me every day till they
go away. I shall call for you on Saturday at eleven. Our train leaves
Waterloo at eleven-thirty.”

“Just fancy a whole week at the seaside together! It will be perfect,
won’t it?”

There was a silence eloquent of an embrace. I waited, anxious to know
where they were going.

“You don’t mind a quiet place?”

“I should have minded it a year ago. I like it now.”

“Well, Lowhaven is quite quiet, and at this time of year we shall
probably have the hotel to ourselves.”

There was another embrace, and, conscious that the interview might
draw to a close any moment, I stole downstairs.

I would go to Lowhaven and stay at the same hotel. It might lead to
something. In thinking the matter over I had arrived at the conclusion
that I, having apparently no motive in young Gascoyne’s death, could
use means which would be unwise on the part of people upon whom
suspicion would fall as a natural consequence of their crime.

Supposing unseen I dropped aconite, or some such poison, into a
whisky-and-soda, how could suspicion possibly fall on me? At any rate,
it was worth while going to Lowhaven. I could not quite make up my
mind whether to travel by the same train, or to precede them, or to
follow them. Even such minor details required careful consideration.
It was impossible to say which method of procedure might not leave a
clue to the acute mind of Scotland Yard.

Discovering that there was only one hotel at Lowhaven, I decided to go
down on the previous day.

Lowhaven turned out to be a mere village, at which I was somewhat
sorry, as every new arrival became at once an object of attention. The
hotel was situated at the extreme end of the tiny parade. Such walks
as I took were all in the direction that led away from the town.

Whether I should write my own name in the hotel book or not was a
question. I was undecided about it up to the last moment. I reflected
that it was quite possible that a smart detective might take the
trouble to find out all about the only visitor to the hotel if
anything should occur. As a matter of fact, there were three other
visitors in the hotel, a mother and two daughters, who as a rule kept
to their rooms, only emerging to go for walks or drives.

Gascoyne and his companion did not come by the train they had settled
on, and I began to wonder whether after all they had changed their
minds and gone somewhere else, or whether circumstances had prevented
their coming at all. I was far too cautious to ask or seek information
even in the most round-about way.

I studied the time table in the privacy of my own room. There was
another train which would bring them down about five o’clock.

I established myself in the vestibule with some afternoon tea in front
of me, and a little after five they drove up looking deliciously
happy.

I grew quite sentimental over them, and was compelled to take a long
walk to cure myself.

I had, before I left town, decided that aconite would be the best
thing I could use if I chose to run the risk of a poison which left
evidences. Aconite essentially knows its own mind, and the struggle is
not a long one.

After tea I went for a long tramp, and on my way back met them walking
along the edge of the cliff. They were entirely engrossed in each
other and barely noticed me as I passed, although there was not
another soul in sight. The day had been perfect, but a gale sprang up
as soon as the sun went down, and the rioting wind shook the little
hotel as if it had been matchwood. There were six of us in the hotel
dining-room at dinner, and with true British aloofness we had placed
ourselves as far apart as possible. The lady and her two daughters
dined in silence, as if it were a solemnity too deep for words. I sat
alone and surveyed the reflection of young Gascoyne and Kate Falconer
in the mirror in front of me. A bottle of champagne decorated their
table, and between the courses they gazed into each other’s eyes in an
ecstasy of happiness. After dinner the widow and her two daughters
disappeared. Young Gascoyne smoked a cigar and took coffee and
liqueurs in the vestibule with his chair pushed close to Kate
Falconer. By half-past ten everybody in the hotel had gone to bed, and
I lay smoking innumerable cigarettes and thinking deeply, while the
storm howled and raved without. In the morning when I awoke there lay
before me a panorama of foam-crowned waves, driving furiously to the
shore or tossing tumultuously and flinging their spray into the air.

It was Sunday, and despite the terrific wind the widow and her
daughters went off to church, disappearing up the winding path of the
cliff with superhuman struggles against the wind. I was late, and
watched them from my bedroom window.

As I passed down the corridor on my way to the dining-room I met a
servant carrying a breakfast tray. It could only be for Gascoyne and
his friend, and I would have given a great deal to have had five
seconds with that teapot undetected.

It disappeared into bedroom No. 10, and I went downstairs to a
solitary breakfast in the dining-room. The day passed quite
uneventfully. The two lovers appeared to a late lunch and spent the
afternoon in a bow window in the hall. Young Gascoyne smoked
cigarettes which Kate Falconer lit for him, a proceeding contemplated
by the elder of the widow’s two daughters—who, apparently a little
wearied by the company of her relatives, had descended to read a book
in an armchair—with a tightening of the upper lip. Kate Falconer’s
bringing-up, however, had trained her to the disapproval of the more
respectable members of her own sex.

I suppose the day would have been very dull but for the state of
suppressed excitement I was in. Once I almost thought my chance had
come.

After tea the lovers parted for the first time since they had arrived.
She went upstairs and he went to the reading-room. I strolled out into
the garden and glanced in at the window. He was seated at a table
writing letters. After a few minutes I returned to the hotel. As I
entered the door a waiter was carrying a whisky-and-soda to the
reading-room. I sat down in the hall and waited, not imagining that I
should be able to reach the whisky-and-soda but determined not to lose
a chance. In a minute or so the waiter returned to the servants’
quarters, and in a few minutes more Gascoyne came hurriedly out of the
reading-room and ran lightly upstairs. I walked slowly into the room.
The whisky-and-soda, untouched, stood on the writing-table by a
half-finished letter. Unfortunately there was a glass door between the
reading-room and the hall, and it caused me to hesitate. The next
moment Gascoyne was back again in the room and the opportunity was
gone.

He and Miss Falconer, who seemed to have recognised me, had evidently
more than once made me the subject of conversation, but had been too
wrapped up in each other to take any further notice. Finding ourselves
alone, however, he became quite companionable. He had charming manners
and a singularly pleasant voice. I took a fancy to him from the first,
and keenly regretted that our acquaintanceship must be so short.

I was compelled by the exigencies of the situation to avoid anything
like actual friendliness, which I could see young Gascoyne was
perfectly ready to display.

I had five days in which to do my work.

Monday passed uneventfully. It was a glorious day, and Gascoyne and
Miss Falconer went out early in the morning and did not return till
dinner-time. There was nothing to be gained by impatience. The only
thing was to watch, and to seize the opportunity should one occur.
Tuesday and Wednesday went by, and on Thursday I heard Gascoyne tell
the manageress that they would be leaving the next day. It seemed as
if my visit were to be in vain.

I had ascertained that Gascoyne and Miss Falconer had two rooms on the
same landing as myself, Nos. 10 and 11. On Friday morning, the day of
their departure, as I was on my way downstairs I saw a breakfast tray
for two on a chair on the landing outside their room. The breakfast
was untasted. It was obviously theirs, and the waiter had most
probably gone back for something.

There was not a soul in sight. I looked over the staircase. There was
no one to be seen in the hall below. In a second my resolution was
taken. Swiftly I took the tiny phial containing the aconite from my
pocket and dropped a few grains into the teapot.

As I descended the stairs I met the waiter returning, breathless. He
held a sugar basin in his hands, which he had evidently forgotten. I
went on to the dining-room. To me the hotel was already full of the
ghosts of pain. I was haunted even in that moment of stress by the one
weak spot in my scheme. Aconitine is not instantaneous, neither does
it rob the victims of their intelligence, which remains clear and
undisturbed till the end. Should either of them be asked if it had
been suicide the reply would of course be in the negative, and that
would be an awkward factor at the inquest.

In a few minutes the hotel was in a state of excitement. This was what
I had expected. The doctor was telephoned for from the village. Before
he arrived, however, all was over and an awful gloom descended on the
place. I felt severely the disadvantage of not knowing all that had
passed in the death chamber. It appeared that the widow lady
thoroughly understood nursing, and had at once ordered anyone who
could not be of use out of the room. I was certainly not likely to
pretend to any medical knowledge, so I remained in the hall asking
eagerly for news from anyone who came down from the sick room, the
widow’s two daughters, all their reserve banished, keeping me company.

It was their mother who brought us word of the tragic ending.

In a few minutes everybody in the hotel was gathered in the hall
discussing the affair in hushed voices, and it was at this moment that
the doctor bustled in.

“I was not at home when you telephoned,” he said.

The manageress explained that the people he had come to attend on were
dead.

“Surely not, my dear Miss Worcester. Let me see them at once.”

The widow stepped forward.

“I have been a hospital matron, doctor, and I have no doubt about it.”
She commenced to lead the way upstairs, the doctor and the manageress
following her.

In a few minutes the manageress reappeared.

“Telephone to the village and tell them that someone is to come from
the police-station at once.”

This was unpleasant, and I must confess to a dismally nervous feeling,
but I was somewhat reassured by hearing the manageress say in
conversation with the widow:

“I think it must have been suicide.”

“They seemed very happy,” said the widow.

“Lately married, I suppose.” And the manageress raised her eyebrows
and looked at the widow interrogatively.

“One must not judge, but I fancy——” the widow stopped. She did not
look the sort of woman who would take the least pleasure in scandal.

The doctor sent down again in a few minutes instructions to send a
messenger for another medical man. The driver of the hotel fly mounted
a horse and rode off in hot haste. We wondered whether it was possible
that after all they were not dead. I scarcely knew which I hoped for.
I was not sufficiently hardened to be without a vague desire that they
should be alive. At the same time, it would be a terrible nuisance to
have to do the work all over again.

Our doubts were soon set at rest. When the doctor came down he
announced that there was no longer the least doubt that life was
extinct. Gascoyne’s card-case and his town address had been
discovered, and his father had been wired for, who replied that he
would be down by the next train. At the time he was expected I went
out. A nameless horror came over me at the idea of seeing the father’s
face in its first grief and despair.

When I returned to the hotel the coroner had arrived. The post-mortem
took place that afternoon; the inquest was held the next morning, and
I attended.

Mr. Gascoyne first gave evidence, formally identifying the body of the
man as that of his son. He was marvellously self-controlled, but his
face was ashy. So far it had been impossible to communicate with any
of Kate Falconer’s relatives, but in the course of the inquest a
telegram was received by the coroner from a sister, who stated,
however, that she had not seen her for two years.

The evidence of the waiter who carried up their breakfast followed. He
deposed to leaving the breakfast tray in the room, when they appeared
well and cheerful. It must have been about ten minutes later that the
bell was rung violently and he hurried upstairs. He found the young
man in an armchair and the young woman lying on the bed, both of them
evidently in great pain. He immediately went for the manageress. The
young woman kept on crying out that she had been poisoned, and the
young man’s distress at her suffering was such that it was impossible
to get anything out of him.

The evidence of the widow and the manageress followed. Then came the
doctor, and the court grew tense with interest.

It was undoubted, he said, that death was due to aconite, taken
apparently in a cup of tea. When he arrived at the hotel they were
both dead. Death had been singularly rapid. The other medical man
corroborated.

The case had a distinct element of mystery, but in the absence of
evidence of motive it seemed that a verdict of suicide was inevitable.

The inspector strengthened this presumption by the intangible
insinuation which he managed to convey in his evidence. The jury
obviously thought it curious that in reply to a question from the
foreman he explained that nothing which could be shown to have
contained the aconite was to be found.

Still, the coroner summed up distinctly in favour of suicide, and such
was the decision of the jury, a verdict which caused Mr. Gascoyne the
greatest distress.

Immediately after the verdict he took his son’s body back to town,
leaving instructions, as I discovered, that the girl’s funeral was to
be at his expense unless the relatives wished otherwise, and that he
personally would attend, a display of feeling I had hardly thought him
capable of.

I returned to town late that night and reached my house at Clapham in
the early hours of the morning.

As I opened the door it was as if the voice of an unseen presence
pervaded the emptiness of the house, whispering: “Murderer!” and when
I awoke the next morning it seemed as if the heavy gray light of dawn
wove itself into haunting, opaque shapes. With a shudder I realised
that never again should I be alone and at peace.



Chapter VII

After such a brilliant success I felt that I required rest. It would
not do to set to work again until my nerves were thoroughly restored,
and the period of excitement I had passed through had left them a
little unstrung. It took me nearly a month after Gascoyne Gascoyne’s
funeral to recover from the haunting terror that I had left a clue,
and that sooner or later someone would come across it. I had scoffed
at the maxim ‘Murder will out.’ I found myself living in company with
it. It had a way of springing into my head when I woke in the morning,
and the letters danced in front of me like devillings. It repeated
itself in my brain rhythmically for days, and it required the
strongest effort of will on my part to silence it.

It must be remembered that I was very young, and that what I had done
was irrevocable; further, I am not naturally callous. I remained
indoors smoking a great many French cigarettes, and accustoming myself
to the consciousness of guilt. Grahame Hallward called one evening
and, declaring that I looked too ill to be left, offered to spend the
night with me. I was about to accept, but refused hastily on
recollecting that in my sleep I might fill the house with confessions.
No man can be answerable for himself in the silent watches of the
night. It gave me a distinctly weird feeling when I reflected that
till my dying day I must lie alone o’nights with locked doors.

Grahame Hallward, unaware that I had chosen my profession, threw
himself with all the loyalty of his nature into the question of my
future. He could not understand my indifference, and, considering
that I had borrowed a fairly large sum from him, it probably
appeared a little unfair. He loved me too well, however, to give
the least indication that he considered I was not behaving quite
straightforwardly.

He suggested that I should go to South Africa, but I pointed out that
without capital I could not hope to obtain work that was not mere
drudgery. I explained also that I had some plans which I would tell
him of later, but that at present they were not dependent on myself,
which was perfectly true. I was fully aware of how important it was
that I should secure some means of obtaining a regular supply of
money, and at the moment I had not the least idea as to how this was
to be done. It must obviously be something which would not occupy my
whole time. I regretted my wasted capital every day. I might have made
a small income out of racing. It would not have been very difficult
provided I contented myself with small profits.

Whatever happened it was imperative that I should not sell my house.
An insignificant, semi-detached villa in Clapham was an ideal lair. I
thought at one time of seeing if I could obtain a footing on the
stage—that refuge of the vain and derelict—but I decided that it might
bring me into such prominence as might even cause the Gascoyne family
to take notice of me, the last thing to be desired.

Day after day I racked my brains for a solution of the difficulty. I
believed I could carry through any feasible scheme, and my Jewish
blood taught me to rely on my powers of application.

While I was deciding on a good method of providing for my current
expenditure, I was also deciding on which member of the Gascoyne
family my next blow should fall, and I consulted the chart daily.

It was highly improbable that the father of young Gascoyne would have
any more children unless his wife died and he married again, and
although her grief at the death of her son was extreme, she was not
made of the material that succumbs under sorrow.

It was with a weird sense of shock that one morning I received the
following letter:

  “Dear Sir,

  “Some time ago you wrote claiming relationship to the Gascoyne
  family, and asking me to help you to some situation in which you
  might earn your living. I must apologise for my unsympathetic
  attitude on that occasion. Should you still be in need of a post I
  shall be glad if you will give me a call.

    “Yours very truly,
      “Gascoyne Gascoyne.”

The letter, together with the morning paper, was lying in the hall
when, half asleep, I passed through it one early spring morning on my
way to the kitchen to cook my breakfast. I was at the moment doing
such housework as was necessary. I made myself a cup of tea, toasted
some bread and boiled an egg before I opened it. Having read it I sat
still as if mesmerised by its contents. I thought I must have
misjudged the man, till I reflected that had it not been for the blow
my hand had dealt him his nature would have remained hard as before. I
was on the borderland of remorse, and it was the aim of my life to
keep out of that ghostly territory. I had from the first made up my
mind to regard the whole matter of the Gascoyne family from a purely
business-like point of view, and so I turned to the practical side of
his letter, which required consideration.

Was it possible to make use of him in any way? That was the essential
consideration. The first thing to decide was whether it was likely he
would recognise me as having been at Lowhaven. As far as the inquest
was concerned I had no fear. I had kept well out of his sight. On the
other hand, even supposing he had not seen me, was it good policy to
conceal the fact that I had been there—always supposing that I decided
to make use of him? At any moment someone might turn up and betray the
fact, and a reason for the concealment would not be easy to find.
Perhaps some idea of putting me in his dead son’s place had entered
his mind, and thus the question of finance would be settled. I
pondered over the pros and cons for nearly a week. One day the pros
carried all before them and the cons were in full retreat. The next
day the retreating objections had entrenched themselves, impossible to
dislodge. The cons had behind them the full force of a nervous
objection to facing Mr. Gascoyne, an objection well to be understood.
Still, the solving of the financial difficulty was all important. I
was near my last sovereign. I could always refuse any offer he made me
should it threaten to clip my claws too completely, or smother my
freedom of action in a London office. I waited till the sovereign was
broken into before I made up my mind. In fact, I waited till my last
half-sovereign was eighteenpence to the bad, and all my boots showed
signs of wear. Then I decided to risk it, and I wrote saying I would
call on Mr. Gascoyne at his City address at noon the next day. I
received a telegram saying that he would prefer it should be one
o’clock, from which I deduced that he proposed to give me his luncheon
hour, and would possibly ask me to share that meal should I be
presentable. I have always had a rare instinct for deducing correct
conclusions from the faintest suggestions, and it has been invaluable
in acquainting me with the peculiarities of fields on which imminent
battles were to be fought. Evidently Mr. Gascoyne was inclined to be
friendly, therefore modesty and frankness were the weapons with which
to make the victory decisive. He was a business man, and, considering
my circumstances, nothing was to be gained by outward display. Indeed,
a plain dressing for the occasion—blue serge, blue foulard tie with
white spots, and a bowler—was absolutely right, and did not
necessarily suggest a Bond Street wardrobe in reserve, rendered
temporarily useless for lack of good boots.

I was as nervous as I have ever been when I mounted in the lift to the
second floor of the tall block of buildings in the City where Mr.
Gascoyne’s offices were situated. I could not help reflecting that
young Gascoyne must have ascended in the same lift times without
number.

It was not for me, however, to indulge in such reflections, and I
shook off any morbid cobwebs from my thoughts and stepped into the
outer office with a subtle and affected consciousness of innocence
which I was by constant practice enabling myself to assume at will.

The clerk took my card and noted the name with a look of intelligence.

“Oh yes, Mr. Gascoyne is expecting you, but there are two gentlemen
with him now. Please take a seat. I will tell him you are here.”

He went to a speaking-tube and informed some one at the other end that
Mr. Rank was in the office.

“Mr. Gascoyne will see you in one minute.” And he returned to his
papers.

In a moment Mr. Gascoyne opened the door of his inner office, showing
out two elderly men. Whilst listening to their last words he motioned
me to enter with a grave smile.

In a minute he joined me and closed the door of the office behind him.

“Please sit down, Mr. Rank.” He seated himself on the chair behind his
desk and motioned me to the one opposite. I could not help noticing
how much he had aged in the two or three months that had elapsed since
I had seen him last.

“You are not like the Gascoynes,” he said, with a smile, “and yet
there is a something.”

“My father was a Jew, and I think I am like him.”

“To be frank with you, I have taken the trouble to find out exactly
the relationship in which we stand.”

I felt alarmed. It was distinctly unpleasant to hear that he had been
making inquiries about me.

“This is my mother’s photograph,” I said, handing him a small likeness
of her. He looked at it with interest.

“It is a very sweet face. She is dead, I believe?”

“Yes, I have no nearer relative than Henry Gascoyne.”

“Ah, poor old man, I am afraid he does not know anyone. He is quite
childish.”

“So I understand.”

“Have you ever seen the family portraits at Hammerton?”

“Never.” I was determined to deny any particular knowledge of the
family.

“Your mother is extraordinarily like some of the women. I do not know
the present Earl, but I have visited Hammerton as an excursionist.”

“I have never been there.”

“And now will you come and have some lunch? I am a busy man and cannot
afford to waste time.”

Either he was wonderfully softened, or the letter he had written me
when I first applied to him was utterly unlike himself. I was unable
to make out which was correct, but I inclined to the former
conclusion.

“I have been wondering,” he said, when we were seated over some
cutlets and a very good bottle of wine, “why you were so long in
answering my letter.”

I replied, with every appearance of frankness, that it had taken some
amount of thought before I could decide to put my pride in my pocket
and swallow his former snub.

“I thought it was that,” he answered. “I must frankly admit that my
reply to your application was very uncalled for, but when I wrote it I
was smarting somewhat under the ingratitude of a young man I had taken
into my office a short time before.”

“It is forgotten,” I said. “After all, men in your position must
receive a host of requests for favours that you are unable to comply
with.”

“That is true,” he said, “quite true; but still, from one claiming
relationship—however, let us forget it. Tell me about yourself.”

I was perfectly candid, and told him the story of my life. It was all
inexpressibly strange; this man bending forward with every appearance
of interest and sympathy listening to the life story of his son’s
murderer. I was amazed at the way I could pose, even to myself, as a
perfectly innocent person, and was secretly vain of a great artistic
success. I found myself filling in the picture which I was painting
for him with numerous little touches, all deliberately designed to
heighten a carefully considered effect. I told no lies, however;
indeed, it was quite unnecessary. Without that part dealing with his
own son the simple story was very effective. I did not hesitate to
hint that there was the memory of a woman troubling me. He was
sympathetic at once but did not urge further confidences at the
moment.

“Perhaps one of the other reasons why I was not particularly drawn by
your being a member of the Gascoyne family,” he said, when I had
finished, “was that I am not on friendly terms with any of them. My
wife was of humble origin, and such of them as I know were very
uncivil to her, and, to tell you the truth, the name of Gascoyne had
become somewhat distasteful to me.”

We were strolling back to the office and he had laid his hand loosely
in my arm. He had evidently taken a fancy to me. So much for the voice
of Nature. Indeed, all my life I have noticed that the voice of Nature
is a somewhat misleading guide; very apt to call the listener to
follow over all kinds of dangerous and quaking bogs. People have a
way, too, of labelling the shrill scream and tuneless croaking of
their own pet conventions and prejudices as the voice of Nature, if
the occasion suit them, and their shallow consciences do not
imperatively demand correct definitions.

“Before I make you the offer that is in my mind,” he said, when we
again reached his office and I was once more seated opposite to him,
“I wish to ask you whether you heard that I lost my only son a few
months ago under somewhat tragic—circumstances.”

“I was at Lowhaven,” I said gently.

He looked at me in unfeigned surprise.

“You were at Lowhaven?”

“I did not mention it before, but I was staying in the same hotel.”

“I don’t remember you.”

“I kept out of your way. I was naturally unwilling to intrude at such
a time.”

He buried his face in his hands, and something between a groan and a
sigh escaped him. It was evident that the memory of his bereavement
was inexpressibly poignant.

“I am glad you knew him, if only by sight. Did you ever speak to him?”

“A few words in the hotel smoking-room, that is all. He was a splendid
looking fellow.”

“He was. It has broken his mother’s heart. It was strange that you
should have been there.”

“I did not even know his name, till——” I paused.

He uncovered a haggard face.

“Well, it is over; the past cannot be recalled. Would you care to come
into my firm?”

He made the offer hurriedly, as if anxious to escape from painful
thoughts.

He then laid his plan before me. I was to come into the firm and learn
the business of stockbroking. Further than that he was not prepared to
go, and he made no promises.

He looked at me steadily as he said this, and I gathered that if I
were satisfactory I might hope for all things. A glance at his face
convinced me that he was not the man to recede from any promise, no
matter how much his sympathy with me became a diminishing quantity,
providing my abilities were sufficient. I accepted his offer. It might
be possible to use the situation as a lever. It certainly put an end
to the obscurity which I had considered so strong an asset. I have
often wondered before and since the trial whether my original plans
might not have been more successful. I believe that they would have
furnished more adventure and excitement. At the same time, the
difficulties would have been almost insurmountable, and—well, I chose
my methods and I failed, although I have consolation in the brilliance
of the failure.

I was to have two hundred and fifty pounds a year to begin with. It
was decidedly a princely offer, considering that he would be paying
for the trouble of teaching me.

“Later on, Mr. Rank, it would give me pleasure to present you to my
wife. At present I am afraid that you, in the plenitude of your youth
and manhood, might rouse sad thoughts.”

He drew me a cheque for twenty pounds, and, taking me into the outer
office, introduced me to his manager, chief clerk, and the staff
generally, and, asking me to be at the office at ten o’clock the next
morning, dismissed me.

I walked all the way back to Clapham thinking deeply. Financially I
was evidently out of danger for life, and I had good warrant for
dreaming of myself at the head of Mr. Gascoyne’s firm. It was proof of
how entirely the Gascoyne coronet had become an obsession with me,
that the prospect of a permanent income, with wealth, even, in the
perspective of middle life, did not in any way suggest that I should
relinquish the glittering prize on which I had set my heart. Perhaps
if Mr. Gascoyne’s offer had come before my first success I might have
abandoned my purpose, but it would have been obviously absurd to
burden I had almost said my conscience—so strong is the habit of
conventional thought—with a murder abortively. I could not help
smiling ironically on recalling Mr. Gascoyne’s evident liking for me.
According to all rules of accepted psychology I should have had
something unpleasant in my personality which he should at once have
detected. It was extraordinarily remiss on the part of instinct that
it should not have been so.

Grahame Hallward came in to see me that evening and was overjoyed at
my news. He was evidently impressed when he learned that it was my
relationship to the Gascoyne family which had secured me such an
advantageous situation.

“So after all, Israel, what you used to tell me was true.”

“Did you ever doubt it?”

“Not since the day you gave me your word of honour that it was so.”

It may appear strange, but I have always been singularly fastidious
about my word of honour.

Grahame then broke to me some news which came as a staggering blow.
Sibella was engaged to Lionel Holland.

“The one thing I really like about Holland,” he concluded, “is the way
he has stuck to Sibella.”

I could not simulate indifference, and Grahame saw that his
announcement had been a shock to me.

I stood looking out on the little garden with its soot-begrimed walls
which the sunset had drenched in scarlet, trying to control the
tempest of feeling which surged within me.

Grahame understood, and came over, putting his arm round my neck.

“I am so sorry, Israel. I quite understand. Really, I’d sooner it were
you.”

I smiled somewhat bitterly.

Grahame’s preference for me was hardly a consolation, fond as I was of
him.

“I’ll come over on Sunday,” I said.

“Do.” He understood my anxiety to impress Sibella with the idea that I
did not care. I wondered whether things would have been different had
Sibella known of my altered prospects. I was convinced that I held at
least an equal place with Lionel Holland in such affection as Sibella
was capable of. It was Thursday; by Sunday I might possibly have
conquered the first sting of chagrin sufficiently to conceal my
feelings. The excitement of my new venture in life was entirely lost
in the night of despair I passed. Equally with the Gascoyne earldom,
Sibella was my ambition. She was the kind of girl to whom the position
of Countess Gascoyne would have come quite naturally. In common with
her brothers and sisters she had that which would have enabled her to
carry off any dignity, frivolous and superficial as her real nature
was. I had dreamed of the joy of placing her in a position so very
much above anything she could have expected.

Still, the battle was not over. I believed in my power to conquer her
in competition with Lionel Holland, if I were given equal worldly
advantages, and it seemed as if such advantages were coming my way.

The fact that I was unable to idealise Sibella never cooled my love. I
burned for her, and frankly confessed it. For the rest, she had
spirits and special magnetism enough to make her a delightful
companion. A great many of her faults matched my own weaknesses. I
sympathised with her desire for beautiful clothes at any cost, as well
as with her yearning for the right of entry to that society which the
middle classes exalt by envying and imitating.

I made up my mind to fight, and went for the first time to Mr.
Gascoyne’s office somewhat comforted by the mere determination to give
battle to my rival.

I discovered very speedily that the work suited me admirably. The rest
of the clerks evidently gathered that my being taken into the firm had
been made a special feature of, for they treated me almost with
deference.

I had by this time fixed on the next member of the Gascoyne family
whom I intended to remove. It was Henry Gascoyne, the orphan son of
Patrick Gascoyne. He had a sister, but all intervening females yielded
precedence to my mother, as heiress to her father. It was therefore
not necessary to consider her. Her brother was about twenty-two years
of age, and by a little inquiry I learned that he was at Oxford, where
he had already gained a reputation as one of those who might do
wonderful things if he chose to apply himself, but who preferred to be
content with the reputation of his potentialities and the cultivation
of as much muscle as was consistent with nights spent in hard
drinking. I inspected his father’s will at Somerset House, and learned
that he and his sister had been left some fifteen thousand pounds
apiece, which capital, however, they could not touch till Henry
Gascoyne was twenty-five. His sister was entirely devoted to him, and
spent her own income in keeping up a small house in the New Forest
which he had inherited from his father. He would have been content to
let the whole place go to rack and ruin, but devotion to her father’s
memory, and a desire to have a place which her brother might look upon
as home, induced her to support the establishment entirely out of her
own resources. So much I had learned from two or three visits paid at
irregular intervals to the neighbourhood.



Chapter VIII

The Sunday after Grahame had brought me the news of Sibella’s
engagement I visited the Hallwards. I managed to get through a
conventional speech of congratulation, stung to self-possession by a
certain radiance and exhilaration in Sibella’s bearing. Grahame had
told them of my good fortune, and there was a distinct change of
manner towards me on the part of the other members of the family. They
had never wholly believed that I was related to the Gascoynes, or had
thought that if it were true I was making the most of a very remote
connection. To them I had been the object for as much patronage as
they dared display towards one not prone to endure condescension. I
could see that Sibella looked at me with a new interest. She was
growing into a truly beautiful woman, and all trace of the slightly
suburban minx was becoming rapidly obliterated by a crescendo of style
and distinction. It was quite evident that she would have the manners
and self-possession of a thoroughly well-bred beauty, and she had
acquired a facility for putting on her clothes with an altogether
overpowering effect of distinction. It seemed to me a little curious
that a character which I knew to be somewhat small should have
achieved a certain impression of breadth and ease in her personality.
Probably it was the result of the unquestionable fact of her extreme
beauty. At any rate, she was rapidly learning the secret of
predominance, and she showed, captivating and delicious, in distinct
relief to her surroundings.

Mr. Gascoyne’s twenty pounds had enabled me, through the purchase of
decent boots, gloves, etc., to bring my wardrobe into play again. I
had dressed as rakishly as possible, determined that Sibella should
have no satisfaction in the dejection of an unsuccessful lover. I knew
her character and the pleasure she would have derived from it. I
simulated the best of spirits, and Grahame loyally helped me to
sustain the illusion. I was inwardly consumed with jealousy whenever
my hungry eyes fell upon her, but I roused myself for a _tour de
force_ in acting and succeeded. Lionel Holland came in later. I saw
him through the large drawing-room windows coming up the path,
supremely confident and jaunty. He was evidently surprised to see me.
We had not met since the evening of my humiliation. I greeted him
cordially, however, and he was obliged to be civil, but I had the
satisfaction of feeling that he was by no means at his ease. He was so
perfectly assured that, being poor, I was an interloper in a
well-to-do house, that he would have liked, I am sure, to ask me what
the devil I meant by intruding. I on my part was galled by the
attitude of superior intimacy he assumed in a house where I had been
intimate when he was a stranger to it. I was perfectly determined that
he should not dislodge me, and that nothing he said or did should
interfere with my visits to the Hallward establishment. He was staying
to supper as a matter of course, and I detected a shade of annoyance
on his face when Mrs. Hallward, in consequence of an aside from
Grahame, extended an invitation to me to do likewise. I accepted,
although I was compelled to submit to the disappearance of the lovers
to the schoolroom for fully an hour previous to the meal. I sang and
played to the others as I had been in the habit of doing, and worked
hard to make myself agreeable. I was so far successful that Mrs.
Hallward asked me why I came so seldom, and discussed the Gascoyne
family in a corner of the drawing-room with me after supper. She was
herself the great-grand-daughter of a Nova Scotian baronet and never
forgot it, although she had saving perception enough not to allude to
it directly. As a rule she brought it in with some such remark
as—“There is I believe a baronetcy knocking about in our own family
somewhere—where exactly I don’t know—but it is there,” a remark subtly
framed, so as to convey the impression that, being no snob, she
forbore to mention how very near the said baronetcy was, in fact, that
it was knocking about so very near that it was quite possible a
collision might occur at any moment.

She was most decidedly a snob, but not of an objectionable kind. As a
matter of fact, I have always considered well-bred snobs rather
pleasant people, and have often wondered whether they would have been
as well bred if they had not been snobs. People who love the
pleasantly decorative in life have at least taste, and the preference
for titles, fine surroundings and social paraphernalia may be a form
of art.

“Do you and Lionel ever see each other in the City?” asked Sibella,
who, I had already remarked, was not so much in love that she could
refrain from teasing her lover.

“Never,” said Lionel shortly.

“For eighteen months I hardly went near the City,” I answered.

“Doing other things?” asked Lionel, in an unpleasant tone.

“Living on my capital,” I answered airily, giving him a keen, steady
glance of daring. “It was the most beautiful time I have ever had, and
I don’t regret it. It will never come again, and I might have spent it
in a dingy City office.”

“Earning your living,” put in Lionel.

“There was no necessity,” I laughed.

Grahame gazed at Lionel in haughty inquiry as if desirous of knowing
what he meant by being rude to his guest.

In fact, Lionel’s airs of intimacy and general at-homeness obviously
irritated Grahame not less than the constant use of his Christian
name.

I declined to be drawn into displaying the least sign of annoyance,
although Holland seized every opportunity to deliver innuendo or
satire, the latter weapon in his hands becoming more often than not
mere clumsy facetiousness. I made a point of being gay, and without
talking of my prospects in Mr. Gascoyne’s firm took very good care to
leave the impression that it was their promising nature that accounted
for my good-humour. I managed by judicious circumlocution and tact to
bring the conversation round to reminiscences, throwing them far
enough back to prevent his joining in, and slyly flattering Sibella on
the subject of her childish achievements so that she revived memories
with zest, and became engrossed with the recapitulation of events and
bygone adventures in which I, and not Lionel Holland, appeared as her
cavalier.

“I believe Lionel is getting jealous,” she remarked towards the end of
supper, noticing her lover’s sulky taciturnity.

I had been secretly sure of that fact for the last twenty minutes, and
had been enjoying a discomfiture which the rest of the company had not
appreciated. He had also, as I perceived, grasped that whenever I
chose I was quick and dexterous enough to leave him conversationally a
laggard every time.

Not that I relied on these qualities to pass him in the race for
Sibella’s appreciation. My instinct in female psychology was too sure.
Certainly, if such superficial qualities could have dazzled any woman,
they would have dazzled Sibella, whose mind was prone to skim airily
and gracefully the surface of things. Even the most transparent of
women, however—if there be such things as transparent women—elude
analysis when the exact qualities which attract them in their lovers
come under consideration.

Sibella was hardly the character one would have imagined overlooking
the pinchbeck in Lionel Holland, and yet she had accepted it with a
most surprising ease. Such a surrender seemed to negative all her
leanings, at any rate in surface matters, to the well-bred and
socially ascending scale. True, he would be rich, but Sibella had
other admirers who would be richer. He had personality, and perhaps
this wins with women more than anything. With all his faults he was
not insignificant, and he was undeniably a very beautiful young man,
notwithstanding his obvious veneer.

I had taken my courage in my hands and stayed and smoked with Grahame
in the library, knowing full well that Lionel and Sibella were in each
other’s arms in the schoolroom. It is strange how we manage to endure
the things which in anticipation were to slay us with their mere
agony.

Mr. and Mrs. Hallward were lax in their supervision of the engaged
couple, as they had been about everything else in connection with
their children. Sibella and her lover remained undisturbed when her
father and mother retired for the night, and it was passably late for
a young woman of respectable family to be letting her lover out when
the front door closed behind him. She evidently heard our voices, for
she came into the library.

“You two still here?”

She seated herself on the club-fender. She was wide awake, and I
remembered that as a child she had never betrayed sleepiness at
children’s parties—she always expressed her capacity to stay up to any
hour. Her family complained that she never could be induced to rise in
proper time in the morning.

“Isn’t it lovely, Israel, for you to have had such a piece of luck!”

“Oh, I shall always fall on my feet,” I answered, easily. “You see, I
was born lucky, and that is better than being born rich.”

“How do you know you were born lucky?” she asked with interest.

I was not to be questioned out of my pose. “It’s like genius. An
instinct teaches the genius to know himself, and something of the same
thought instructs the lucky man.”

I spoke with such perfect good spirits and conviction that I could see
she found herself believing me. She perched herself on the edge of the
great desk which occupied the centre of the library and asked for a
cigarette.

“Don’t smoke, Sibella,” said Grahame. He was the sort of man who would
not have objected to the female belongings of anyone else smoking, but
who objected to his own doing so, on the ground that it was his
business to see that they suffered no material damage in the eyes of
the world.

“What nonsense, Grahame! Of course I shall smoke—as much as I
like—well no, not quite as much as I like because that would spoil my
teeth, and I don’t intend to do anything that would injure my personal
appearance.”

“That is a very patriotic resolve,” I laughed. “There is some beauty
so striking that it becomes a national property.”

Sibella made a face.

“Thank you. I’m nothing of the kind.”

“For goodness’ sake don’t flatter Sibella,” said Grahame. “She is vain
enough already.”

“So long as she is vain and not conceited it does not matter.”

“The difference?”

“Well, vanity is a determination to make the best of our superiorities
whilst frankly admitting them; conceit is a morbid desire to enforce
the fact on other people.”

“Subtle,” murmured Grahame, who never spoke above his middle tones,
“but I am not convinced. Sibella thinks a great deal too much of
herself.”

“It is better than thinking too little of one’s self,” said Sibella,
blowing rings of smoke and pursing up her lips deliciously, till I
could have cried out on her for heartlessness.

“Very much better,” I assented. “People who think too little of
themselves generally end by a mock humility which is a form of conceit
infinitely tedious. No, believe me, the vanity you decry has in it
something of virtue.”

Grahame turned to Sibella.

“Haven’t you noticed, Sibella, how much older Israel has grown of
late?”

“Not in looks,” cried Sibella. “To-night he looks like a boy.”

This idea pleased me. The author of the secret that lay in young
Gascoyne’s grave looking almost a boy savoured of the incongruous, for
which I had developed an appetite.

“I didn’t mean in appearance,” said Grahame. “Israel looks as if he
had never had a trouble.”

The idea pleased me even more. Grahame’s criticism showed that I was
playing my game with the right effect, and that the weeks of
prostration following on the successful _coup_ at Lowhaven had left no
effect. Sibella, from her very nature, could not forbear giving me one
or two glances with just enough of feeling in them to fill the
atmosphere with a vague suggestion of sentimentality, but I behaved as
if the very air she breathed was not to me love’s own narcotic. I
fought fiercely against myself lest I should give the least sign that
her power over me was supreme as ever.

“What lovely chocolates you used to bring me, Israel!”

I laughed buoyantly.

“Ah, but you remember the first Lionel brought you. They cost more.”

“As if I cared for that!”

Grahame laughed in his turn.

“As if, Sibella dear, you ever cared for anything else.”

Grahame had the most incomparable way of pointing out people’s faults
to their faces without offence.

Sibella, however, looked angry.

“No one can say that I am mercenary.”

I was at some pains not to join Grahame in the roar of laughter
provoked by this remark. Sibella knew of old how impossible it was for
her to cope with Grahame, so she turned the batteries of her anger on
me.

“I believe you quite agree with Grahame.”

“What about?”

“About my being mercenary.”

“I am sure I don’t.”

“Then why did you laugh?”

“I didn’t.”

“Well, I’m not mercenary, am I?”

“Of course not.” I smiled.

She detected the irony.

“Lionel never says such things to me.” For one instant I felt the lash
and smarted. I was half inclined to retort “Lionel is the prince of
good manners,” but that would have given her the satisfaction she was
waiting for, and most likely she would have gone to bed.

Grahame at heart was very proud of Sibella, but he, like myself, was
under no delusions about her. His special fondness was also partly a
result of their having been so much together as children. Mr. and Mrs.
Hallward’s other children were much older, and with the exception of
Miss Hallward, an unmarried spinster verging on forty, were either
married or out in the world. Miss Hallward, who must have been
singularly handsome in her youth, and who as a matter of fact was so
still, had devoted her whole life to her brothers and sisters, and was
particularly fond of Sibella, who made use of her in every possible
way. Miss Hallward had always been singularly kind to me, and I liked
her.

I could well remember an incident which occurred on the occasion of
one of my first visits to the house. Sibella had been asked to do
something by Miss Hallward and had refused, and, working herself into
a rage, had told her sister, who at that time could not have been more
than thirty, that she was a disappointed old maid and that nobody had
wanted to marry her because she was so unattractive. Miss Hallward had
grown very white, and had turned on Sibella with a fierceness I never
saw her display before or after. The occurrence was unimportant,
except that it served to frame her, as it were, in the past of an
unhappy love story, and she was always the more interesting to me
because of it.

When I said good-bye to Sibella I felt sure that she was more
interested in me than she had been since as a boy of sixteen I had
declared my passion and had been granted the privilege of kissing her
when opportunity offered, little love passages of which Grahame had
remained in entire ignorance. I also saw that I had succeeded in
giving her the impression I was aiming at—that I was wholly freed from
her spell. To a girl of Sibella’s temperament this is at all times
amazing, and so far from being glad at her rejected lover being in
spirits she was at pains to detect the unhealed wound. Still, she was
in her way really in love with Lionel Holland, and was not prepared to
invest more than the smallest superfluity of coquetry and fascination
in bringing me again into her net. I verily believe it would have
given her some pleasure to see Holland and myself at each other’s
throats. Then she would probably have been content to leave me to some
other woman. Had she known how near I was at times to seizing her in
my arms and kissing her, with or without her will, she would have been
satisfied—more, I think she would have been frightened.

She had a peculiar and unexpected effect on me. I found myself
wavering in my purpose, and returning once more to the question which
I had thought decided as to whether the risk I ran was worth the
prize. I even found myself troubled with scruples as to the taking of
life, and for some weeks was in serious danger of abandoning my
undertaking.

And yet I cannot say that Sibella had any direct influence for good
upon me, and it would have been hard to define why she should have
exercised a restraining influence upon me at all.

I continued my visits to the Hallwards and saw that her pique at my
apparent indifference to her engagement grew.

She might have been content with the number of admirers to whom it had
obviously been a matter of some moment, but Sibella wanted the one
admirer to care who was apparently indifferent.

I evidently pleased Mr. Gascoyne at the office, for his cordiality
towards me increased daily. I threw into my manner towards him just as
much of the filial attitude as I could without suggesting the least
desire to usurp the place of his dead son.

After a few weeks he asked me to come and dine and meet his wife.

“By the way, Rank, my wife does not know that you are a relative of
mine, and for certain reasons I would sooner you did not mention it—at
least yet.”

He was evidently nervous lest his wife might think he had been quick
to fill their dead son’s place.

“I have my reasons, and I am asking you to oblige me,” he added
cordially, noting the faint look of surprise I thought it policy to
assume; it would never have done to let him think I could be treated
unceremoniously.

I dined at the house in South Kensington, outside which I had so often
watched. It seemed a quiet and sad household. Mrs. Gascoyne possessed
the feminine capacity for filling the house with the presence of her
dead, and turning a home into a tomb. Mr. Gascoyne was pleased that I
managed to make her smile once or twice, and said as much as we sat
over our wine.

“I am afraid there is very little to amuse you here, but I should be
glad if you would dine with us now and then. I think my wife likes
you. You have dignity, and she always likes people with dignity.”

I laughed.

“You have been very good to me, sir,” I said.

“I see in you excellent qualities, Israel.” It was the first time he
had ever called me by my Christian name. I was obviously progressing
in his esteem.

He was right. I had excellent qualities. I always had. I am
affectionate, naturally truthful and kind-hearted. My secret deeds have
been an abstraction, in no way in tune with the middle tones of my
character.

Mr. Gascoyne was essentially a business man, and it was my business
qualities which appealed to him most. I had a natural gift for order
and method, and although he was not given to praise, I detected a look
of pleased surprise when I displayed some unusual perception of what
was wanted in a particular situation. Lionel Holland, who at least
seemed to have imbibed a wholesome fear of irritating me when we were
together, could not witness my progress in the scale of prosperity
without making an attempt to injure me in the eyes of my employer.

It appeared that he knew a fellow-clerk of mine, a youth who
considered that I had ousted him from the place which should in time
have been his. I had not been in the office a couple of hours before I
grasped this fact. He was a pleasant fellow enough in an ordinary way,
but his disappointment had brought out—as far as his relations towards
me were concerned—his worst points. He had a slight acquaintance with
Lionel Holland. This acquaintance the latter improved upon, and I was
not a little surprised to find Harry Cust one Sunday afternoon sitting
in the Hallwards’ drawing-room. He was staying with Lionel from
Saturday till Monday, and I think it gave his host infinite pleasure
to introduce him where I had been known from childhood—though what
particular satisfaction it was to him I could not quite see.

I soon realised that my life’s history was in the possession of my
fellow-clerks. I was too much in favour with Mr. Gascoyne for them to
venture to show the contempt they felt because my mother had let
lodgings. I would have been glad if one of them had had the temerity
to throw it in my teeth, for an insult to my dead mother would have
found me a perfectly normal person with an absolutely primal sense of
loyalty.



Chapter IX

I missed no opportunity of finding out every detail of young Henry
Gascoyne’s college career. From all accounts he must have been
surprisingly lazy, for no one ever spoke of him without giving him
credit for great abilities. He was at Magdalen, had just scraped
through his Mods at the end of his second year, and had then
apparently given up any idea of serious work, for in a few months his
devotion to pleasure and his defiance of college rules became so acute
that he was ignominiously sent down. A few days after this auspicious
ending to his career as a student, I met him riding in the
neighbourhood of his New Forest home with a most cheerful countenance,
and humming a tune. I was on my bicycle, and later I came across him
again in a by-lane down which I had turned with the object of smoking
a pipe. My appearance was quite unexpected and a little awkward. His
horse was tethered to a gate, and folded in his arms was a remarkably
pretty girl of the cottager class. I wondered if all the human
obstacles between myself and the Gascoyne earldom were engaged in
surreptitious love affairs.

The girl drew back hastily and hid her face, but not before I detected
that she had been crying. I was walking my bicycle, and was a little
annoyed that Henry Gascoyne had had such a good opportunity of seeing
me. He was evidently thoroughly wasting his time from the worldly
point of view, though I should probably have agreed—had he put the
matter to me—that he was making the best of his youth.

He was not exactly handsome, but he had a colouring which, despite his
dissipated life, gave assurance of clean blood. He was well made, and
had hair the colour of ripe corn. Notwithstanding, however, his
eminently healthy appearance his self-indulgence had absolutely no
limitations except such as were prescribed by good form, and he was
prepared to leap even this boundary if he could do so without danger
of being seen.

He had the misfortune to be cursed until seventy times seven with the
forgiveness of his friends; Harry Gascoyne was not a person they could
be angry with for long. He had been known to steal a man’s mistress
and yet retain his friendship, and as I saw him that summer morning,
booted and spurred, playing with the little cottage maiden as a cat
might have done with a mouse, the indulgence he managed to secure for
himself from his fellow-men was not difficult to understand.

I knew that his next move would be London. A young man with means and
no one to control his actions is as sure to gravitate towards London
as the lizard is to seek the sun. His sister, who should have been the
man, urged a profession, suggesting the army, but Harry Gascoyne
kicked at the mere idea of a life of routine and discipline. This much
I had gathered at the tiny little inn half a mile from the Gascoynes’
house, which was much frequented by the old man who combined for them
the office of indoor and outdoor factotum. The keeper of the
public-house itself had been placed in his present position by Harry
Gascoyne’s father, so that the establishment quite partook of the
character of a feudal outpost. In addition, the landlady had been cook
at the Grange.

“’E’ll never do no work, won’t Mr. ’Arry,” said the old factotum, as
he smoked his pipe on the wooden seat by the doorway and surveyed the
pines etched black against the crimson flush of the setting sun.

“Not ’e, not ’e,” agreed the landlord, taking in the prospect with as
little poetical refreshment as his companion.

They were very proud of being able to converse with intimate knowledge
of the gentlefolk living hard by, and conducted their conversation
like inferior actors, casting side glances at their audience to watch
the effect of the performance. Their audience was myself, seated on
the wooden bench on the other side of the doorway and regaling myself
with cold beef and pickles. Vanity has always kept me from drinking
alcohol in any form, otherwise I verily believe I might have been a
drunkard. I think, perhaps, that being unaccustomed to spirits, a
glass of strong brandy on a certain grim morning that draws nearer and
nearer will not be amiss.

But for this great matter of vanity, how many more drunkards would
there not be! Not many with a weakness for the bottle are restrained
by the immorality of voluntarily surrendering the gift of reason, or
the prospect of declining in the scale of prosperity. The first
objection appeals to them not at all, and the second is not
sufficiently apparent in its immediate effects for it to act as a
deterrent. An immediate coarsening of the features and a general
degradation of appearance are different matters. Few people care about
being repulsive, and to the real drunkard this fact soon becomes
apparent.

The two old men found the Gascoyne topic most absorbing, and talked
incessantly, till the crimson light behind the pines changed to a
faint opal, and the stars were alight in the heavens.

“’Is feyther, ’e never done no work,” said the landlord.

“That be true,” said the other, as if he were bearing witness to some
virtue of the late Mr. Gascoyne.

“’E spent a deal of money too,” said the landlord.

“’E wur generous with ’is money,” answered the other.

“And none ’ave cause to know that better’n we.”

“That’s true enough.”

“Miss Edith be more like ’er mother. A nice lady but a bit close.”

“It was as well one of ’em wur close or there wouldn’t ’ave been much
left.”

“True.”

There was a whole family history in these few remarks. A man born
rich, but a rake, and possibly a profligate—a long-suffering wife
enduring the slur of meanness in her efforts to save something from
the wreck. Indeed, it appeared a wonder that she should have saved so
much.

Evidently young Gascoyne took after his father. I gathered afterwards
that the reason there was anything in the nature of estate left was
because the money and house had been largely the property of Mr.
Gascoyne’s wife, and it was through her forethought that the boy and
girl had been left equally well off.

“A girl’s natural protector is her brother,” her husband had said when
he and his wife were discussing the matter. “It is natural the boy
should be better off than his sister. If it is otherwise it puts the
lad in a humiliating position.” Mrs. Gascoyne, however, did not think
so. She had absolute confidence in the girl’s affection for her
brother, whilst from early boyhood she had detected a singular
likeness between the lad and his father. Yet although she trusted the
girl, it was possible that she loved the boy more. Indeed, it was her
very love that caused her to make provision for him in his sister’s
affection and rectitude.

All this I learned by degrees.

I learned also that the girl I had seen in his arms was something
better than a cottager. She was the daughter of a blacksmith who was
fairly well-to-do, and it was a tribute to young Gascoyne’s courage
that she possessed not only a father, but half a dozen stalwart
brothers, who would most probably have killed him at sight could they
have witnessed the embrace that summer morning in the lane. As I sat
smoking my pipe in the perfect summer night, with the fragrant perfume
of pine and tobacco mingling, I heard someone coming along the narrow
strip of white road bordered with grass, whistling.

It was young Gascoyne on his way home.

It was evident that so far satiety had not begun to knock at the doors
of conscience, for a more careless, happy creature it would have been
impossible to imagine.

He paused outside the inn in the middle of the road, hesitating. I
think I gathered what was in his mind. He was trying to decide whether
he should go straight home to his sister, who was probably waiting for
him, or stay and drink more beer than he would have cared for her to
know of. Already the rose of his youth was coarsening slightly through
the habit he had inherited from his father.

He came to the opposite seat and sat down. He was the incarnation of
the born lounger. There was a careless ease in his carriage, and a
just perceptible touch of exaggerated fashion in his clothes, which
betrayed a pleasure in personal appearance, something beyond that
merely incidental to youth.

At first he barely noticed my presence on the other seat, mistaking me
in the gloom—for I was sitting in the shadow of the house—for some
village yokel having his fill before going on his way home to a
scolding wife. Gradually, however, it dawned upon him that the
occupant of the other bench was not one of the stray labourers who
patronised the place. As for myself, I was wondering whether I should
retire before he entered into conversation with me, or run the risk,
and see if matters turned out to my advantage.

“Quiet place, this,” he said, tentatively.

“I’m glad to say it is,” I answered, lazily.

Always answer lazily when a well-bred Englishman addresses you for the
first time. It impresses him.

Young Gascoyne gathered from my voice that he was presumably talking
to an equal. He became friendly.

“I suppose you mean,” he said, laughing, “that you came here for
quiet, and that you mean to get it.”

“No, I don’t quite mean that. So long as I can sleep where it is
quiet, I don’t care very much about absolute silence.”

“Then I may talk to you? The evenings are so beastly dull down here.”
I made a very shrewd guess at the way he had been spending the earlier
part of that evening. The possibility of six brothers to fight must
have been exciting enough, but then Harry Gascoyne belonged to the
class that wants amusing all the time.

“The stillness of the nights here is awful—especially depressing if
you’ve been used to keep it up till the small hours of the morning.”

“I should have thought that it would have been a welcome relief.”

“I don’t find it so.”

“I suppose you’re too young to feel the need of rest.”

He laughed. Evidently he thought it a good joke.

“Oh, I say, you’re not much older than I am, if at all. Of course I
can’t quite make out in this light, but——”

“I’ve seen a good deal,” I interrupted.

“You’ve come from town, haven’t you?”

“How did you guess?”

“Oh, one can always tell.”

“Sorry I look such a cockney.”

“Everybody who comes from town isn’t a cockney. It would be rather
awful if it were so.”

“Then how could you tell?”

“Oh, the best of people get a bit careless in the country. It’s
something in the way town men put on their clothes. Fellows who live
in the country will tell you that it isn’t quite good form to wear
your clothes too well, but that’s all rot. They’re jealous because
they know they’re slovenly.”

I liked the way he talked, and, finding me companionable, he showed
not the least desire to move. A new friend always interested me, so I
put away any unpleasant reflections as to our future relations, and
abandoned myself to the pleasure of a novel and pleasant
companionship. My cousin chattered on, and gradually, as will almost
invariably happen when two young men are talking together—the more
especially over the bowl—the eternal feminine dominated. He was
obviously neurotic, for all his healthy skin and philistine view of
life in general.

He talked of women incessantly, but without any reference to their
share in the higher things of life.

He hinted vaguely of the existence of the cottage maiden, but declined
to be drawn when I encouraged him to take me into his confidence.

“It’s a ripping thing to be in love; in fact, it’s the only thing that
reconciles me to stopping in this beastly hole.”

“Romance is life,” I murmured, lilting agreeably to the rhythm he
desired. “I don’t understand how people get on without it.”

“I suppose there comes a time when everyone wants to settle down,” he
said, echoing the usual concessions of profligate youth to the demands
of a period so very far ahead that there appears to be little
inconvenience in confiding all promises of reformation to its keeping.

“When we are tired,” I assented. “Perhaps that is the truest
definition of virtue, not to run any race with excesses we are not
equal to.”

“I say, that means a pretty long rope for young people, doesn’t it?”

“Yes, the rope will give out with youth, and then they can
conveniently hang themselves.”

“I say, for goodness sake don’t talk like that. I shan’t dare to walk
home.”

“Are you afraid of the dark?”

“Yes, I believe everybody is more or less.”

“You are frank, at any rate. What a time primeval man must have had of
it! I should say that when night fell these woods were alive with
ghosts. I suppose the man with muscle was the only possible
romanticist in those days. It was romance under its most healthy
aspect.”

“You mean that men had to fight for their women?”

“Exactly; so much muscle, so many women.”

“The women must have feasted on the sight they love best—men at each
other’s throats.”

“On the other hand, the woman must now and then have lost the weakling
on whom she had set her heart.”

From primeval woman we wandered by easy stages to woman, beflounced,
befrilled and perfumed—woman on the path to supremacy.

“I don’t know,” said young Gascoyne—the glamour of his cottage romance
upon him, “but I don’t think I care about the sophisticated sort. You
never know when they are telling the truth. There was a girl at
Oxford——”

Then followed a long story of a rather stupid romance of his college
days, ending with, “And that put the finishing touch, and I got sent
down.”

“Sent down?” I murmured casually, as if it were news.

“Yes, frightfully unfair. The other chap got off scot free on the
ground that he was a hard worker and that there was nothing against
him. Said he loved the girl and intended to marry her. Silly ass!”

Young Gascoyne asked me to lunch the next day. I refused, but he
announced his intention of walking over in the morning to fetch me.

“It’ll be quite a relief to have someone to talk to. I’ve got one or
two fellows coming down next week, but at present it’s deadly.”

He bade me good-night again and again but each time sat down and
commenced a new conversation.

“I’m coming up to town in the autumn to read for the Bar. Then I shall
have as good time as is possible for a man with no money.”

“What do you call no money?” I asked.

I knew the amount of his income to a penny.

“Eight hundred a year. A fellow can’t do much on that.”

I laughed outright. “Eight hundred a year is a fortune to a man with
no encumbrances, especially in town.”

“Well, I can’t exactly say I haven’t got any encumbrances. There is
this place to be looked after. Not that I do much towards it, I’m
bound to say. I should like to sell it, but my sister likes it and as
she lives here she does most of the keeping-up.”

I strolled down the road with him. He was rather the worse for the
amount he had drunk, and hiccoughed slightly as he affectionately bade
me good-night and assured me that he would be round the first thing in
the morning.

Leaning out of the little inn bedroom I considered the question of
accepting his invitation to lunch.

So far I had withheld my identity. If I went to the house on the
morrow I could no longer conceal the fact that I was a relation.

When they knew who I was, it might or it might not make my task more
difficult, and by this my action must be guided entirely.

I finally came to the decision that I could not expect to gain any
access to young Gascoyne unless I followed up the acquaintance.

It was quite possible that when he discovered who I was he might drop
me at once. I was a relation, certainly, but my comparatively humble
origin on my father’s side would not, I imagined, make me very
acceptable. Besides, I had gathered that Miss Gascoyne was very proud.
She was of good family on both sides, and the villagers spoke of her
as being cold and haughty. She hardly sounded like the kind of woman
who would forgive a Gascoyne a mésalliance. It was obvious that I must
make her brother thoroughly understand who I was before I accepted his
invitation. There was another point to be considered. Mr. Gascoyne was
their uncle, and I knew that his brother had not been on good terms
with him because he had married a tradesman’s daughter, although from
what I had seen of Mrs. Gascoyne, she had seemed to be quite fit to
take her place in any family. Mr. Gascoyne might be offended if I
became acquainted with his nephew and niece. I knew from one or two
chance remarks which he had let fall that he bitterly resented the
fact that they had never made any sign of wishing to become
reconciled. I was a little astonished at this, because, after all, Mr.
Gascoyne had money to leave, and I should not have thought that Harry
Gascoyne was the sort of youth to allow scruples born of family pride
to stand in the way of a possible access of riches. Perhaps I should
discover more in the morning, that is, if my very distant cousin did
not forget all about his invitation, given at a moment when he was not
quite sober.

By twelve o’clock he had not put in an appearance, and I concluded
that he had forgotten me. I waited till one, and was just about to ask
for my bill and ride away when he appeared.

He gave me a swift glance as if to satisfy himself that the favourable
opinion he had formed of me the evening before was correct. Apparently
the verdict was favourable, for he insisted on my going with him.

I pleaded my attire; but he would hear of no excuse.

“Well, perhaps you ought to know who I am.”

“You’re not a criminal, I suppose?”

“Not exactly, but I’m a cousin of yours.”

He looked at me blankly.

“A cousin?”

“Yes, we had a mutual great-great-grandfather—George Gascoyne. My name
is Israel Gascoyne Rank. My mother was a Gascoyne. My father was a
commercial traveller.”

“Oh, I say, that doesn’t matter.”

“I didn’t suppose it would, but all the same it’s just as well you
should know.”

He talked gaily enough as we went along. I watched him keenly, and
every now and then I noticed a shadow cross his face. I could make a
fair guess at the cause of it. He was wondering how he should tell his
sister that the offspring of a mésalliance in the family was her
guest. He would no doubt have liked to ask me to say nothing about it,
but was too well bred to do so. His chance came, however, when I
informed him that I was in his uncle’s office.

He turned and looked at me in amazement.

“I say, there’s plenty of time—let’s go down this path. It’s a longer
way round, but I want to talk to you. It’s all a bit sudden and
interesting, isn’t it?”

We turned down a side path where the white loose sand was strewn with
pine needles.

“You know,” said young Gascoyne, “my father and my uncle Gascoyne were
not on speaking terms.”

“I gathered as much,” I remarked.

“When my cousin committed suicide I wanted to write and say how sorry
I was, but my sister said she thought that it would look as if we were
after his money, so I didn’t.”

I began to wonder if perhaps the desire to throw a very poor relation
in the teeth of this independent young couple might not have had
something to do with the action of Mr. Gascoyne in taking me into his
business.

“My sister has curious ideas. She thinks that if a Gascoyne went into
business he should have changed his name.”

“There are heaps of stockbrokers of first-rate family.”

“Oh, I don’t agree with her in the least. I think it’s all rot, and I
should rather have liked to be taken up by Uncle Gascoyne, but once my
sister gets an idea into her head you can’t move her.”

“Perhaps she may not care about entertaining me.”

“Oh, she’ll be civil.”

“I’ll go back if you like,” I said. “I shan’t be offended. You could
not know who I was.”

He stood still and thought deeply.

“No,” he said, shortly, “come on, you’ll oblige me by doing so. It’s
beastly rude of me to have hesitated. I like you, cousin Israel. You
are quite different from anyone I have ever met.”

I laughed. “You forget. There is my point of view. Mr. Gascoyne may
not at all like my having struck up an acquaintance with you.”

“Well, you can always say you didn’t know.”

“What, and drop you?”

“Not that, old chap.” He linked his arm affectionately in mine. “We’ll
be great friends when I come to town, and damn it all, I’ll be friends
with Uncle Gascoyne whether my sister likes it or not.”

I was not particularly pleased at the idea of this attractive and
well-bred nephew getting into his uncle’s good books; at any rate, not
until Mr. Gascoyne had made me a definite promise as to my future.

I was very curious to see Miss Gascoyne. It was obvious that she was a
strong character. After all, if she were distant it could not do me
much harm, and I could leave soon after lunch.

We came upon the house suddenly. It was an old-fashioned place which
had evidently been added to by degrees. Unexpected gables arose at
every turn, and the red brick and ivy, clinging creeper, and gorgeous
trails of passion flower and purple clematis were exquisitely mellow.

The place looked fairly well kept considering the limited means of the
owners, and that very little of Harry Gascoyne’s eight hundred a year
went towards its upkeep.

“We haven’t any horses since the guv’nor died—at least, that is, I’ve
got a hack.”

“You were riding the first day I saw you.”

“When was that?”

I laughed. “I hope you won’t think my excellent memory bad taste, but
I think I saw your horse tethered to a gate one morning while you were
otherwise engaged.”

“By Jove! Was that you? I thought I had seen your face somewhere
before.”

“I wonder you did not recognise me.”

“I say, don’t breathe a word. It might get about. I can’t keep away
from her, she’s so awfully pretty.”

“Who is she?”

“Her father’s a blacksmith. You’d never think it to hear her speak,
though. I’ve often thought of taking her to town, but I should never
be able to show my face down here again.”

“It would be very awkward for your sister.”

“It would be awkward altogether.”

A figure in white appeared on the veranda. It was Edith Gascoyne,
tall, fair, quite beautiful.

She greeted me courteously, her brother looking on nervously the
while. He then hurried me off to get a brush down, and left me in his
bedroom murmuring that he would be back in a minute. I was perfectly
aware that he had gone to tell his sister who I was. In a few minutes
he returned and I saw at a glance that his short interview had not
been altogether pleasant. There was a determined look round his jaw
that was somewhat unusual, and I guessed that he had been putting his
foot down. If, however, he had been compelled to insist on his sister
welcoming me, she certainly showed none of the chagrin of defeat in
the perfect courtesy and queenliness with which she advanced to me
when I came down into the drawing-room.

“My brother says we are cousins, Mr. Rank.”

“Yes, it is strange my coming across him in this way, isn’t it?”

“Very. I do not know my Uncle Gascoyne, but we were extremely sorry to
hear of his son’s tragic death. You knew him?”

“Barely. I had spoken to him once.”

She waited as if expecting me to talk about young Gascoyne, but I held
my tongue.

“Was my uncle very much affected?”

“Terribly. I don’t think he or his wife will ever get over it.”

“I am afraid he must have thought me very heartless.” She evidently
felt somewhat guilty at their neglect.

We went in to lunch. Everything was wonderfully well done, and I could
see that she was determined to make the Grange as attractive as
possible to her brother, and to give him no reason for keeping away
from it. I recall that quiet Sunday lunch most vividly. The long, low
dining-room with its panelled walls hung with pictures of dead and
departed ancestors, the stretch of green lawn with the blue depth of
the pine-wood beyond. From somewhere came the scream of a peacock,
that perfect discord which only nature could have attempted. On my
left at the head of the table sat Miss Gascoyne, beautiful and white,
in a condition of stately and armed truce.

She managed most perfectly to import into her expression every now and
then something which might remotely have laid claim to being called a
smile. For the rest, she listened to me during the greater part of the
meal with every appearance of attention, answering me with no vulgar
or obvious intention of a desire to snub me, although her disapproval
of my presence was patent.

I made her laugh, however, as soon as I had discovered the vulnerable
point in her armour of gravity. Finally, I ventured an appeal to her
snobbery; for I could see that she was a snob, although in her it was
a vice trained and cultivated by breeding into what might have passed
before the world as a virtue.

I thought that I might venture to mention Hammerton, and did so, a
little fearful that she might give me to understand that it was high
presumption in me to consider myself in any way interested in the
feudal home of the Gascoynes.

She was, on the contrary, frankly interested.

“I have never been there,” she said. “I have only met the present Lord
Gascoyne once, when I was a child. My brother and I were invited to
his coming-of-age, but my mother had died only very shortly before,
and we did not care to go.”

I shrewdly guessed that had the decision been left to her brother he
might not have found his sincere grief at his mother’s loss an
insuperable bar to his enjoying himself at Hammerton.

I continued, watching her carefully, prepared to beat a hasty retreat
should she show the least sign of disapproval at the channel into
which I had directed the conversation.

“Directly I saw you to-day I noticed how very like you are to some of
the portraits at Hammerton. I was only there once, but I remember one
distinctly.”

“I should like to see the family pictures. Do you know Lord Gascoyne?”

“Oh, dear no, not at all. I went there quite as an excursionist. It
was rather quaint going round as a tripper. The remarks of the people
I was with were most amusing.”

The suspicion of a shadow crossed her face. She was not pleased to
think of the mob tramping through those ancestral halls for which she
had an almost Chinese reverence. I detected her disapproval, and
hastened to add:

“They were in no way irreverent; far from it, I think they were most
impressed.”

“I suppose,” she said, “it is good for that sort of people to be put
in mind of those who have been chiefly responsible for making England
what she is.”

I had considerable trouble to forbear smiling as I recalled the career
of some of the Gascoynes.

“That sort of people had something to do with the making of England.
It was not the aristocracy who used the bow and arrow at Crecy.”

We both turned with some surprise to young Gascoyne. It was a deeper
remark than he usually gave vent to.

“The people are nothing without their natural leaders,” Miss Gascoyne
replied.

“You think the aristocracy are the natural leaders of the people?”

“Surely.”

“It seems to me,” I answered, for I saw that it did not flatter her to
agree too readily, “that the people got very little done for them till
they chose leaders of their own.”

“Perhaps I ought to have said that the aristocracy are the natural
leaders of the nation, and not of the people. There is a difference,
is there not?”

I appreciated the concession in civility implied in the appeal. I was
evidently gaining ground.

“I quite see the distinction, and it is a true paradox.”

Young Gascoyne, who had seemed anxious and fearful during the first
part of the meal, feeling that I had conquered and entered the outer
works of at least acquaintanceship, grew happier, and said:

“Rank is afraid that Uncle Gascoyne will hardly be pleased to find
that he has made friends with us.”

“I am not afraid,” I interposed hastily, for I saw that Miss Gascoyne
had stiffened perceptibly.

“You said he was sure to be annoyed.”

“That is quite a different thing. He has been very kind to me, but he
can hardly expect to veto my acquaintances.” I was about to say
“friends,” but checked myself in time and added: “Besides, I don’t
think he would wish to do so.”

“He seems rather a jolly old chap from what you say.”

“He is everything that is generous.”

I made a point of always speaking enthusiastically of Mr. Gascoyne.
Someone was sure sooner or later to repeat what I said.

“We should be sorry to do anything to injure your prospects, Mr.
Rank.” Miss Gascoyne spoke with just the faintest suspicion of
stiffness.

“I don’t think that is likely,” I laughed.

After lunch she left us alone to smoke. Young Gascoyne wheeled two
armchairs to the window, which was delightfully shaded, and, giving me
an excellent cigar, seated himself opposite with a pipe, and began to
talk of his love affair. Since he had discovered that I knew of the
secret meetings he had been only too anxious to make a confidant of
me.

“She absolutely prevents my thinking of anything else. I ought to be
working, you know, but I can’t. Every time I settle down to do
anything I think of her—she’s in my head and she stops there. The
whole day long I wonder what she’s doing. She’s an absolute servant to
those great big lubberly brothers of hers. Of course, they are kind to
her in a way, but they want her to marry some lout out of the village.
I don’t know how it will end, I am sure.”

“Oh, these things have a way of deciding themselves.”

“Yes, but not always satisfactorily.”

“Why, you don’t think——?”

“No, I don’t mean that, at least I hope to goodness not.”

“You had better make up your mind to forget her and come to town.”

“I couldn’t do it. It isn’t in me. It would take a will of iron. If my
sister were a man she would do it, but then Edith couldn’t have fallen
in love with anybody beneath her.”

This was so obviously true that it required no comment.

I was busy thinking while young Gascoyne babbled on, quite happy that
he had a listener. I reflected what a very useless person he was in
the world. He was quite right when he accused himself of a lack of
will. The probability was that at forty he would be a confirmed toper.
He was a pleasant companion enough, but had evidently as little
capacity for true friendship as for anything else.

His sudden affection for me was purely fictitious. I was the nearest
thing to hand, and an ordinarily amusing companion was a godsend amid
his present dullness. In town he would have seen nothing of me at all,
unless I could contribute to the gaiety of his life; in which case he
would no doubt give me a proportionate amount of his attention. The
poor girl whom he had honoured with his affection was likely to have a
very bad time of it should any mischief accrue. He was lovable enough
in his way, but he was of no particular value to mankind in general.

He was living in danger of at least a very sound thrashing from the
girl’s brothers if not from her village suitor, and it was most
probable that should matters become acute he would—although not
deficient in courage—leave the situation to settle itself without him,
and the girl to take care of herself. Perhaps the brothers might not
find out; young Gascoyne might ride away; the girl might dry her eyes
and in time wed her village admirer, who would remain in ignorance of
the guilty little episode in her life. If the brothers found out, were
they the sort of men likely to take a violent revenge, and if they
were not was the lover such a man? It was worth ascertaining. I
decided to spend the next week-end at the village where the girl and
her relations lived.

Later, young Gascoyne showed me over the Grange. There was not very
much to see. It was a fairly roomy house, commenced in the Tudor
style, and completed, or rather building operations had ceased, in the
early Victorian. The latter age was marked by a hideous oblong, stucco
wing devoted to servants and kitchen premises. Every other age had
given the building something fairly picturesque, but the early
Victorian era had given something worthy of itself. The semicircular
porch with its white columns, unmistakably Carolian in character; the
Elizabethan red brick and mullioned panes, the Georgian drawing-room,
and low-ceilinged hall, all made a delightful jumble, and hardly
deserved young Gascoyne’s contemptuous remark that it was a
‘ramshackle old place,’ true in actual fact as such description was.

The room which had been his father’s sanctum was now his; a delightful
room with a south aspect and the only view which was not to a certain
extent impeded by trees. Through the half open door of Miss Gascoyne’s
bedroom I caught a glimpse of a prie Dieu and a large crucifix above
it. Evidently Miss Gascoyne was High Church and devotional.

We joined her in the garden for tea. The sun was yellowing through the
pines, with here and there a faint suggestion of evening crimson, ere
I rose and said good-bye. She evidently liked me, for she asked me to
come again, and seconded her brother when he pressed me to run down
from Saturday till Monday whenever I liked. For a Hebrew youth to have
travelled so far in Miss Gascoyne’s estimation in so short a time was
an achievement.

Young Gascoyne walked back as far as the inn with me, talking volubly
of when we should meet again and of what a lot we were to see of each
other in town. I rode back thinking a good deal of Miss Gascoyne. I
hold—what to the female mind is a heresy—that a man may be in love
with half a dozen women at once.

Miss Gascoyne occupied my thoughts a great deal after I returned to
town, and for the first few days I even thought that Sibella had been
superseded. This I found not to be the case after a visit paid to the
Hallwards, in the course of which Lionel Holland succeeded in rousing
my jealousy to a high pitch by his ostentatious airs of
proprietorship. I was in love with two women: with Sibella
ecstatically as always, and with Miss Gascoyne. I was vain enough to
think that the rapid change in the latter’s demeanour towards me had
been in spite of herself. There was between us a decided sympathy. She
stood for all that, socially, I most admired.

My taste was always catholic, and her coldness and reserve attracted
me immeasurably, although I was also a slave to Sibella’s triviality
and butterfly gaiety. The picture in each case was complete, the
composition harmonious; and from the point of view of charm that is
everything. Dull people may derive credit from their very dullness if
they be consistent and hold their tongues; consistency achieves
character and interest, but an ignoble desire to imitate some
garrulous acquaintance will inevitably lead to disaster. In fact,
social prominence can only be achieved by the expression of the self
in its own peculiar way.

Miss Gascoyne’s stately, lily-like personality had also a peculiar
attraction for my Jewish blood. Her curiously vivid auburn hair, the
almost marble pallor of her skin, the enormous dark blue eyes, full of
a peaceful queenliness, were so alien to my own type as to subjugate
the opposite in me. In my polygamous scheme I could see her nowhere
except on the throne itself. Sibella might have the jewels, Edith
Gascoyne would inevitably demand a share of real power. Miss Gascoyne
made me proud to have a half right to the name she bore. She inspired
me with the same feeling of pride in relationship as the turrets and
battlements of Hammerton had done. For some days I indulged in dreams
in which she and I walked hand in hand through the social pageant,
eminently the right people in the right place.

I said nothing that week to Mr. Gascoyne of my having made the
acquaintance of his nephew and niece. I waited to see how matters
progressed. As I thought things over I came to the conclusion that he
would dislike it more than I had at first imagined. After all, it was
not he who had been insulted, it was his wife, and that was the
difficult thing to forgive. The young Gascoynes’ opportunity had been
their cousin’s death. It was undoubtedly an aggravation of the
estrangement that they seemed to have completely ignored the event.

I went down to Copsley, the village where Henry Gascoyne’s romance
dwelt, to reconnoitre. It was a fair-sized place, a village in the
proper sense of the word, and not a mere hamlet.

Janet Gray’s father was the blacksmith of the place, and he and two of
his sons drove a thriving trade. Three more of his sons were well
placed in the neighbourhood, and the sixth was a soldier, a lance
corporal. Janet and her mother kept house, and from all that I could
hear a happier or better managed establishment it would have been
impossible to find. There was something patriarchal in the way the old
blacksmith ruled his household. I have seen him, when his younger son
proved rebellious, enforce his decree with a strong, effective clout.
He was what would be described as an honest, God-fearing man; that is
to say, he lived strictly within the conventions of his class, and
would have scouted the idea that the rights and wrongs of almost every
subject on earth were not to be easily grasped by a well-intentioned
mind.

His daughter was his joy and delight. He was proud of her looks, which
like those of all of his children were out of the common. When he
stood on Sunday evening in church surrounded by his family, a more
moving spectacle of physical health and primal beauty it would have
been difficult to imagine.

He was also proud of his daughter’s housekeeping capabilities, and not
only he, but his wife and sons, looked forward with dismay to the time
when some stalwart lover would claim her. Mrs. Gray almost hoped that
her sons would marry and settle down first in order to avoid the
desecration of her household arrangements by the unheard-of innovation
of a servant.

Mrs. Gray had a sister, a spinster some years older than herself, who,
having entered the service of the Gascoynes many years before, had
never left it, but had become an institution in the family. The two
sisters were devoted, and it had long been their habit to see each
other at least once a week. Sometimes Janet accompanied her mother,
and when Mrs. Gray was unable to go, for she suffered somewhat from
rheumatism, her daughter went alone.

It was on one of these expeditions that she had met young Gascoyne. He
had related the circumstances to me a dozen times.

“She was coming back to the station through the pine-trees, and I was
struck all of a heap, bowled over first time. I don’t know how it all
came about, but we talked about her aunt. It was something to go on
with. It took me a long time to persuade her to meet me, though.”

Judging by the character and determination in the faces of old Gray
and his sons, it did not appear that the man who trifled with their
womankind would have a very pleasant time of it. It was the identity
of her rustic suitor, however, that I was anxious to discover. I was
not long in doing so, for he haunted the Gray threshold. Personally,
had I been in Janet’s place, I should not have hesitated a moment
between the magnificent specimen of manhood who was anxious to make
her his wife, and the spoilt and vicious youth, who, if her ruin could
have been accomplished with safety, would have regarded it as a mere
pleasurable and excusable incident in his life.

Nat Holway was in every way a splendid fellow. His occasional violence
of temper was a part of the general strenuousness of his character. He
was slowly conquering this failing, however, and was likely to make
the same sort of man as Janet’s father. He had never known any other
sweetheart. It had, at least as he thought, been an understood thing
between them since they were children. He delayed speaking just a
little too long, and it was after young Gascoyne had appeared on the
scene that he asked her to be his wife. To his amazement and the no
little surprise of her friends she refused him. Ignorant of the
existence of Harry Gascoyne in his relation to Janet, they looked
around vainly for a cause.

Was there anybody else in the village? True, young Tom Applin had come
round with an obviously serious intent, but Janet had very soon shown
him that she did not care for him. There were others, but, as she had
never encouraged them in any way whatever, they did not suggest
themselves as a reason for her refusal of Nat Holway. The only excuse
she would give was that she did not care sufficiently about Nat to
marry him.

“But, Janet, you’ve always given us to understand——” commenced Mrs.
Gray.

“Oh, but that was when we were children.”

“No, Janet, that is not quite true. It’s not so long ago that I was
talking of you both settling down, and it didn’t seem but what you
favoured the idea.”

Janet did not answer, but shut herself in her room and, unlocking a
drawer, took out of it a little jewelled trinket which young Gascoyne
had given her, and kissing it passionately, burst into a flood of
tears. The poor girl vaguely realised, if she refused to confess as
much to herself, that her romance was doomed to a dismal ending.
Though she loved Harry Gascoyne she had some dim perception that the
glitter of his charm was largely pinchbeck. She also realised with
true feminine instinct that she had thrown away the only weapon with
which she might have won her battle, and induced him to raise her to
his position by marriage. She was already terrified of what might
happen, and lay awake at nights possessed by the fear of an
approaching presence. She was haunted by the singing of the wind in
the pine-wood where they had first kissed, and stronger and stronger
through the sad, sweet music came the wailing of an infant.

Young Gascoyne was almost as frightened as she at what he had done,
and his true character asserted itself. He positively throbbed with
selfishness. He poured out his woes to me at length. He would begin
with some stereotyped recognition of the girl’s position, thrown in
for the sake of mere decency, but after that it was all about the
awkwardness of the affair as it would affect himself.

“I’m not a coward, old chap, and I don’t mind a good stand-up fight. I
can take a licking as well as any other man, and bear no grudge.”

This I doubted, and set it down as merely the boastful jargon learnt
at a public school.

“But I don’t quite see having to fight the whole lot of them.”

“They look awkward customers.”

“Why, have you seen them?”

I had made a slip. I had not informed him of my visit to Copsley.

“I was passing through on my bicycle, and I just thought I would have
a look in at the blacksmith’s shop.”

“My sister will never forgive me. You see, Janet is old nurse’s niece.
By Jove, it is a muddle.”

He spoke as if the whole affair were not of his doing and as if he
were the victim of a conspiracy.

It was the occasion of my spending a week-end at the Grange.

He discussed many ways of solving the difficulty.

“I shall take her away. There’s nothing else to be done.”

“You will be followed.”

“Not if we go abroad. That’ll be the thing. Edith will come round in
time. I shouldn’t wonder, once Janet were away from that common lot,
if she didn’t improve till one wouldn’t mind taking her anywhere.”

I was surprised to find that he was in earnest about eloping, but his
was not a nature to look very far ahead, and he talked of being able
to get along at some quiet foreign town as if he were not the sort of
person in whom such an existence would bring out all the worst
qualities. At any rate, I was determined to run no risks. I had made
too many inquiries about Nat Holway not to be able to predict with
some certainty what he would do if he discovered the truth.

I posted an anonymous letter from the next village to Copsley written
in an illiterate scrawl. It informed him of Janet’s stolen meetings,
and hinted the worst.



Chapter X

I had by this time informed Mr. Gascoyne of my acquaintance with his
nephew and niece. At first he looked hurt.

“They are very heartless, I am afraid, Israel, very heartless; when my
poor boy died neither of them wrote a line.”

“I am afraid, sir, that young Gascoyne has not much depth, but his
sister seems to me a fine character.”

“What is she like?”

“Beautiful.”

Perhaps something in my voice betrayed what I felt, for he looked at
me keenly.

“She is a little cold. Difficult, I should say, to rouse to
enthusiasm, and she appears to have a will of iron.”

“She hardly sounds alluring.”

“She has charm.”

“Ah! Then everything else falls into line. I should like to see them,
but I can hardly make the advances. You see, my poor brother chose to
quarrel with me for two reasons; first, because I went on the Stock
Exchange; secondly, because my wife’s father happened to have made his
money in trade. It was all very foolish, but year after year
reconciliation grew more difficult, and what had been a breach which I
thought could easily be bridged any moment widened imperceptibly,
until it was impossible to make advances. If Miss Gascoyne would write
to my wife the thing would be done.”

Inwardly I thought it would have been just as easy for Mrs. Gascoyne
to write to her.

“What is Harry like? His father was good-looking.”

“He is handsome enough.”

“Fair?”

“Very.”

“So was his father. Dear me, it seems only the other day that we were
boys together. It is all very sad, very sad indeed. It is incredible
that people should drift apart so.”

“I’ve never had anyone to drift apart from.”

“You have your friends. There is young Hallward. He seems to be very
devoted to you, and, do you know, I have sometimes wondered whether
you appreciate his devotion.”

“Oh, I’m very fond of Grahame.”

“We must see if something can’t be done to bring my nephew and niece
and my wife together. You say you are going down there this week?”

“I thought of doing so.”

“Then you might spy out the land and see how my niece would be likely
to receive advances.”

“I think Miss Gascoyne would welcome them,” I said, with simulated
warmth.

I now felt not the least hesitation in praising the young Gascoynes. I
had complete confidence in my position with their uncle. He was not
the sort of man to commit an injustice, and what he had made up his
mind to do for me he would do; perhaps more, certainly not less.

It may perhaps be wondered why, having a comfortable position and
fairly assured prospects, I did not rest content. That I did not do so
was due to a consistency of aim which has always been my chief
characteristic. In removing young Gascoyne from my path I had burnt my
boats, and there did not appear to be any particular reason, except
that of cowardice, to prevent my pursuing my original purpose. A
middle-class position with moderate wealth in no way represented my
ideal. I had dreamed from early childhood of a brilliant position, and
if possible I intended to achieve one.

I found also that I was a person of a multiplying ambition. I had
begun to meet certain people in a very good set. My musical
accomplishments here stood me in very good stead—as they have done
many another idle young adventurer. Lady Pebworth, who was an amateur
vocalist who would not have been tolerated at a tenth-rate pier
pavilion without her title, was singing at a charity concert at which
I was assisting. Her accompanist failing her, I took his place. She
declared that no one had ever accompanied her so sympathetically, and
asked me to call. I was not of the order of modern youth who gives
some great lady the use of his inferior baritone voice and other
services in return for social protection, but Lady Pebworth had the
tact to treat me with dignity, and I found her extremely useful. I
paid my respects one Sunday afternoon. The drawing-room of her house
in Bryanston Square was crowded, and I at once realised that I was in
the society of people of quite a different tone from anything I had
hitherto come into contact with. Fortunately her invitation had not
been merely formal. She had evidently been anxious to see me, for she
welcomed me with a swift glance of pleasure and came from the extreme
end of the long room to meet me.

“How good of you to come so soon!”

“It was good of you to ask me.”

Then she introduced me to a pretty, dark-eyed woman, whose beauty was
just giving signs of approaching wane.

“Mrs. Hetherington, Mr. Rank.” And she left us.

Mrs. Hetherington talked incessantly, but I replied in monosyllables.
I realised that Lady Pebworth was interested, and my vanity was
flattered that a woman, so evidently admired and courted in a
first-rate set, should be attracted by me. I could see that she was
very much aware of my presence whilst seeming to be engrossed by the
conversation of a man of distinguished appearance suggesting
diplomacy. A feeble-looking young man with rather a pleasant laugh
joined in the conversation between Mrs. Hetherington and myself. He
was evidently inquisitive as to who I might be, and threw out one or
two baits which I avoided.

Mrs. Hetherington droned on about Lord this and Lady that—if she
mentioned commoners at all they possessed double-barrelled names—until
there was a general movement to go. I rose with the others, but Lady
Pebworth with the greatest cleverness managed to avoid saying good-bye
to me till everyone else had gone and we were left alone. Mrs.
Hetherington, who was the last to leave, looked at me with the
insolent curiosity of good breeding as she was making her farewells,
evidently fully conscious of her hostess’s manœuvring.

“Are you in a great hurry?” asked Lady Pebworth, as the door closed
behind Mrs. Hetherington.

“Oh, no.”

“Then sit down and let us talk. I must have some fresh tea, and you
will have something stronger.”

I explained that I seldom drank anything stronger than tea.

She looked at me curiously.

“Dear me! You don’t look a puritan.”

I laughed. The expression as applied to myself sounded quite comic.

“I am afraid my virtue has its origin in vanity. I confine myself to
champagne, and that only occasionally.”

“You are quite right. It is dreadful the objects young men make of
themselves with drink—and women, too, when they cease to attract.”

“Do they ever realise when that time has come?”

“Yes, most women are philosophical enough for that.”

“Women with charm need never cease to attract.”

“That is very true, but you are young to have found it out. It is
usually a discovery of the middle-aged.”

“Age is not altogether a question of years.”

I found Lady Pebworth a mental tonic. She made me talk as I had never
talked before, indeed, as I had never known myself capable of talking.

I realised that I had made a distinct impression, and found myself
calculating how far she might be useful to me.

She evidently knew everyone worth knowing. She could undoubtedly
launch me in the great world if she cared to do so, and I was quite
confident of my ability to keep afloat providing I had a really good
introduction. I could not help smiling as I reflected how envious
Lionel Holland would have been could he have witnessed my
_tête-à-tête_ with Lady Pebworth.

Later Lord Pebworth came in. He was the personification of the elderly
well-bred. It was not probable that he had ever possessed many brains,
but he had the amount of conscience which causes a man highly placed
to do the right thing at the right moment. He was devoid of
enthusiasm, and being eminently safe had even achieved a second-rate
position as a politician, which he was quite persuaded was a
first-rate one. He treated his wife’s young men friends—and I
discovered afterwards that they had been a numerous procession—with
kindly toleration, and even went out of his way to give them a good
time when it lay in his power.

He seconded his wife’s invitation to dinner with great cordiality, and
accompanied me as far as the front door, an attention which was so
unexpected that I began to wonder whether he regarded me as a
suspicious character. He gave me an excellent cigar, and I walked down
Park Lane in the red light of a Sunday evening in summer, feeling that
socially, I had moved on.

Lady Pebworth took me up feverishly, and introduced me to a great many
people who seemed quite pleased to know me. Nevertheless, I realised
that I should have to make hay whilst the sun shone, for unless I
persuaded my new acquaintances to accept me as an intimate I should
very soon be dropped. Great ladies have a way of carrying young men
into the vortex of society to which they have not been accustomed, and
then, when weary, leaving them to be slowly slain by general
indifference, till they are only too glad to find themselves back
again in their proper middle-class element.

I did not consider the middle-class my element, and I was determined
that Lady Pebworth should keep me afloat as long as I chose and not as
long as she chose.

As I was engaged in snaring young Gascoyne, I was only able to give
her a divided attention. This turned out to be as well, for she
concluded that there was another woman, and her interest in me was
fanned by jealousy. She tried all manner of arts in order to discover
who claimed my attention, arts which she imagined were undetected, but
at which I was secretly amused.

Mr. Gascoyne used to chaff me good-naturedly about my smart
acquaintances. Some employers in his position might have resented one
of his clerks spending his spare time among people who would most
probably lead him into extravagance; but Mr. Gascoyne, well born
himself, hardly saw the incongruity of it to the extent that an
ordinary middle-class commercial man would have done.

At the time I met Gascoyne my affair with Lady Pebworth was in full
swing. That is to say, I was getting tired of her, for she had never
really meant anything to me. She was beginning to reproach me with
neglect, and to take exception to my Saturdays and Sundays being
occupied.

I knew how far Lady Pebworth could be useful to me, and I was
certainly not going to drop the solid substance of a position in my
own right for the shadow of her social introductions.

It was quite extraordinary how ready people were to accept and make
use of a young man who carried no other credentials than the good word
of a pretty Countess with a reputation for being rapid. I found myself
dancing every evening with the peerage. I cannot honestly say that I
received many invitations to dinner, or to those more select
entertainments which argue any great degree of intimacy. My keen
instinct warned me of the unreality of my position and of how
necessary it was to make ties of some kind to enable me to retain my
hold on society. The men were civil enough, but I had little in common
with those who talked nothing but the jargon they had learned at a
public school or at one of the ’Varsities.

I had the extreme satisfaction of being seen in a box at the Gaiety by
Lionel Holland and Sibella while I was with Lord and Lady Pebworth and
Sir Anthony Cross, a friend of theirs.

“What a very beautiful girl,” said Lady Pebworth, as I bowed to
Sibella.

“Quite lovely,” said Lord Pebworth.

Sir Anthony Cross said nothing, but I repeatedly caught him looking at
Sibella when Lady Pebworth was not using his opera glasses.

“Who is the man with her?” asked Lady Pebworth.

“Lionel Holland.”

“Is he a friend of yours?”

“I know him. I went to school with him.”

“I see you don’t like him. He looks a bounder.”

Lady Pebworth had in her conversation just that amount of slanginess
which may be permitted to an obviously well-bred woman without its
giving offence.

As we were going out I found myself by the side of Sibella for a
moment.

“You hardly ever come and see us now,” she murmured.

Sibella never lost her charm for me, and the sound of her voice—always
a little sharp and unmusical, even when she made an attempt at
modulating it, which was seldom—played upon my temperament in the most
subtle manner.

I promised to visit them quite soon.

“Next Sunday?” she asked.

“I am going out of town next Sunday.”

Lady Pebworth’s carriage drew up, and, murmuring something about the
Sunday after, I left her.

“Your friend, Mr. Rank,” said Lady Pebworth, “is decidedly pretty.”

“One of the prettiest girls I have ever set eyes on,” said Lord
Pebworth.

Sir Anthony Cross still said nothing, but I had a shrewd conviction
that he was more impressed than either.

On Saturday I bicycled down to stay with the Gascoynes till Monday,
having promised my employer to do all which tactful diplomacy might
accomplish to find out how they would take an effort at a
reconciliation.

I went a certain part of the way by train, and sent my bag on. I had
written to say that I should not be at the Grange for dinner, and
found myself riding through a crimson summer evening with a sensuous
enjoyment in the perfect peace of the rural scenery through which I
was passing. According to the received notion of a man with a murder
on his conscience, external objects, however beautiful, should have
been unable to convey any sensation of peace to my inner being. So far
from this being the case I was immensely soothed, and rode leisurely
on with as much moral quiet as is enjoyed by most folk. After all, the
degree of power of the conscience is entirely a matter of
individuality and force of character. A weak man, hypersensitive to
received social obligation, may fret himself into a fever over the
merest trifle of a moral lapse. I do not believe the aged Cenci slept
the less well for—in the world’s opinion—his awful crimes. I have no
doubt his affectionate family found him in a comfortable doze when
they came to bring him a deeper sleep. The rate at which one great
crime will develop a man’s intelligence is curious. It is a wonderful
grindstone on which to sharpen the intellect. New values, hitherto
unsuspected, develop themselves on all sides. An acute and sardonic
appreciation of society’s laws presents itself, together with an
exhilarating sensation of being outside them, which assists in forming
an unbiassed and comprehensive view. I could never have belonged to
the anarchical type of man, because I never had any comprehension of
or sympathy with those who starve in a land of plenty. I could not
understand the intellect which could live in a dream of a society
regenerated by revolution in the future, and which was yet unable to
help itself to a crust of bread in the present. My abilities were
essentially practical, so I removed those who were immediately in my
way and left the dreamers to remove those whom they esteemed to be in
the way of society.

I was indulging in such reflections as these when I passed the lane
down which I had turned the day I had discovered young Gascoyne’s love
affair. The sun had almost set. Already the greater part of the
landscape was in shadow. The song of the birds was silenced by the
chill of coming night, and they slept. On the horizon the crimson
blaze had sunk, and an expiring streak of amber marked where the day
had passed. The evening star shone solitary, a little pale for the
moment, a faint flame set in a ghastly pallor. I turned down the lane
of the romantic memory; why, I could not have said, unless, perhaps,
some occult informing power gave me a premonition of what I should
find there. The actual road track was quite narrow, there being a wide
expanse of grass on each side. I had not gone very far before I saw a
figure lying in a curiously huddled heap close to the hedge. I knew it
was young Gascoyne at a glance. The expected had happened. My heart
almost leapt into my mouth. How seldom schemes carried as well as mine
had done! I got off my bicycle and looked stealthily around. There was
not a soul in sight. The growing dusk of the lane gave birth to one or
two shadows which somewhat startled me as I went towards the body. As
I turned him over to look at his face a low groan escaped him.

He was not dead. This was awkward. His face was covered with blood,
and there was a terrible wound in the side of his head, while his jaw
hung loose as if it were broken. An idea struck me. I lifted his head.
I almost fancied that I saw his eyes open, and that even in the gloom
he recognised me. I hastened to put my idea into execution. I pressed
my fingers gently to the veins behind his neck. I knew that this would
produce an absolute insensibility which must inevitably end in death
unless succour arrived within quite a short space of time.

After a few minutes I laid him back an inert mass on the turf, and,
mounting my bicycle, reached the main road without meeting anyone.

I could not help regretting as I rode leisurely on to the Grange that
it was Miss Gascoyne’s brother whom I had been compelled to dispose
of, but I agreed with the writer who warned the ambitious that they
must subordinate their affections to their aims in life if they wished
to succeed. It is curious how affection can be subdued. For instance,
I loved Sibella, but I was able to subdue my infatuation and keep it
out of sight when necessary.

It was quite dark when I reached the Grange, and riding through the
fir plantation I was entirely dependent on the light thrown from my
bicycle lamp. Suddenly I received a weird reminder of the figure I had
left behind me lying half concealed in the fern and bracken by the
roadside. Perhaps I was a little more affected by what had happened
than I imagined, for I am not superstitious, and only by reason of
having young Gascoyne’s image vividly in my mind can I account for
what happened.

Half-way through the plantation the light of my lamp fell full on a
white, human face dabbled in blood. It was young Gascoyne’s face, and
the blue eyes were wide open and glazed in death. I saw the head and
trunk to the waist. The rest of the body appeared to be beneath the
ground. So strong was the illusion that I swerved aside in order not
to ride over it, and in doing so fell from my machine. When I picked
myself up my lamp was out and I was in total darkness. I was about to
hurry forward with a mad haste to get out of the wood when I pulled
myself up short. Deliberately I remained where I was, picked up my
bicycle, lit my lamp and mounting leisurely rode slowly out of the
plantation. With such a career as I had planned it would never do to
give way to fancies.

There was a light in the drawing-room as I wheeled my bicycle up the
drive of the Grange. I could see Miss Gascoyne sitting by a small
table with a lamp on it. At first I thought she was reading, but as I
drew near I could see that the book was lying in her lap, whilst her
eyes were fixed on the ground in deep reflection. She came out into
the hall when she heard my voice. I thought there was an unusual
animation in her appearance as she welcomed me.

“Have you dined?”

“Well, not exactly, but I had an enormous tea at a wayside inn.”

“You look very tired.”

Evidently I still looked somewhat agitated by my adventure in the pine
wood. No doubt for want of another explanation it must have struck her
as fatigue.

“I have had rather a busy week.”

We moved towards the dining-room chatting freely and pleasantly, and I
could not help contrasting her present friendliness with the hauteur
and strictly formal manner she had displayed at our first meeting.

We sat and talked while I ate sandwiches.

“Harry said he was going to meet you.”

“I rather thought he might do so, and I looked out for him.”

“It is very rude of him not to have done so, or not to have been at
home when you came. I shall scold him severely.”

She began to talk of her brother and his future. She wanted him to
read for the law. Did I not think it would be the best thing?

“Do you really want my candid opinion?”

“Of course. You know I say what I mean.”

“I think it is about the very worst profession he could follow.”

“But why?”

“Well, apart from the difficulty of the examinations, which in our
days is no small matter, it is a profession in which patience is the
most important factor. There is no other profession like it for
encouraging a naturally lazy man with a small income to idle.”

“I should have thought application was altogether necessary.”

“Absolutely, but it is optional. He cannot get on without it, but
there will be no one to see that he uses his time well. Besides, men
in the law are as a rule strenuous, earnest people with all kinds of
ambitions, and Harry will hardly meet sympathetics.”

“Then what is he to do?”

“I know you will think it rather a curious suggestion, coming from me,
but I give my vote for the Army.”

“The Army? But Harry is poor.”

I inwardly smiled at Miss Gascoyne’s notion of poverty. I knew what
she thought the Army should mean for a Gascoyne:—a crack cavalry
regiment and unlimited private means.

“An inexpensive line regiment.”

“Oh dear!”

I laughed. “It’s the thing, depend upon it. He will be in a profession
he likes, among men who take their profession seriously. After all, he
will have a better average of gentlemen than he would have in a crack
regiment, even if he does not have the high nobility of exceptions.”

“I see what you mean, but I don’t think Harry would ever consent.”

“I believe you could make him do anything.”

I was inwardly congratulating myself on the perfect conviction with
which I was discussing the future of one who by this time was most
probably solving problems in theology.

We talked on till Miss Gascoyne grew anxious.

“I really wish Harry would come home.”

“Shall I go and look for him?”

She knew what was in my mind. His late homecoming meant as a rule that
he was to be found at the inn.

“Was he at home to dinner?”

“No. He has some friends living a few miles off whom I don’t know, and
he rode over in the afternoon and proposed to stay to dinner. There he
is.”

We both listened. Along the hard road came the sound of a horse’s
hoofs.

Miss Gascoyne rose in alarm. Either the horse was riderless or it was
no longer under control. It was not necessary to listen for more than
a few seconds to be convinced of that.

We both went out on to the lawn. A figure came round the corner of the
house and hastened on to the road. It was the groom.

“Oh, Mr. Rank, what can have happened?”

“I will go and see.”

But she went with me to the gate. The mare had evidently come to a
full stop just outside, and was now held by the groom. She was
steaming with sweat and gave every evidence of the greatest distress.

Inwardly I was wondering how it was the animal had been so long in
reaching the Grange. It must have wandered on slowly feeding by the
wayside till it had taken fright at some passing object and started at
full gallop for home.

Miss Gascoyne looked around in dismay for her brother.

“She wur alone, Miss,” said the groom, blankly.

“It doesn’t at all follow that your brother was on her back when she
bolted,” I ventured.

She looked at me, grateful for the suggestion. She was very white, but
her character asserted itself. She turned to the groom.

“Baker, take Jenny round to the stables and make her comfortable as
soon as possible. Mr. Rank and I will walk as far as the inn and you
can follow us.”

“Very good, Miss.” The man did as he was directed.

“I will go as I am,” she said, “though after all I may be alarming
myself unnecessarily.” She was not the woman to treat the situation
hysterically if it could possibly be avoided. I was genuinely sorry
for the grief that was coming upon her. I would have spared her if
possible, but I either had to abandon the object of my life or to put
up with such unpleasantnesses as were involved with the course I had
laid out for myself.

We started to walk rapidly towards the inn.

“I dare say Harry missed his stirrup and Jenny bolted.”

On the way her spirits rose. The fact that we met no one seemed to her
a proof that nothing much was the matter. Sounds of drunken revelry
reached us long before the inn came in sight.

“I will wait here,” she said, as we reached the broadening of the
road. I left her and went on.

  “We’ll all be merry,

  Drinking whisky, wine, and sherry,

  If he can’t come, we’ll ask his son.”

The chorus was trolled forth in disjointed snatches, showing the
singers to be very far gone indeed. The door stood ajar and I went in.
So convinced was I of the necessity of playing my part thoroughly that
I looked carefully round to see if Harry Gascoyne were present. The
half-dozen or so roysterers looked up stupidly with open mouths. As a
matter of fact, they were none of them drinking whisky, wine or
sherry, but had very substantial mugs of ale before them. The
atmosphere was thick with tobacco smoke and heavy with the reek from
peasant limbs. The landlord, with a figure that threatened apoplexy,
surveyed them from the other side of the bar with an approving smile
as if he were presiding over an assemblage of highly well-behaved
infants. To me he suggested a genial but relentless ghoul, callous to
the feelings of the mothers and children who were to welcome home
these repulsive sots as governors and lords of their lives and
welfare.

They sat waiting for me to speak.

“Has Mr. Gascoyne been here to-night?” I asked.

The landlord looked round the room, and, having as it were satisfied
himself that none of the others knew of the young man being concealed
unknown to himself, answered slowly:

“I ain’t seen ’im.”

“No more ain’t I,” came in phlegmatic chorus.

“Are you quite sure?”

“Quite.”

“Thank you.” I withdrew.

Miss Gascoyne came forward out of the dusk into the light which
streamed from the front door.

“He’s not there,” I said gravely.

She looked at me in dismay.

“Shall I tell them?” I asked.

She reflected for a moment.

“Yes. He may have fallen from his horse. We must look for him at
once.” I turned towards the inn.

“I will come with you,” she said, and we passed through the low door.

The song had not been resumed. Evidently my errand had given food for
conversation. The landlord paused in the middle of something he was
saying and got down off his stool.

“Mr. Gascoyne’s horse has returned home without him, and we are afraid
he may have been thrown and hurt.” I spoke in a loud tone.

At the sight of Miss Gascoyne the whole assemblage had risen. She was
looked upon by the cottagers around with not a little awe.

“Will some of you oblige me by helping to look for him?”

The landlord, who had had more than one passage of arms with the
justices of the peace as to the way in which his house was conducted,
became officiousness itself. Anything to prove to the gentry what an
estimable and respectable character he was.

“It ain’t like Mr. Gascoyne to get into trouble on horseback,” he
said, with a laudatory shake of his head, as if to conciliate Miss
Gascoyne by conveying to her what a very high sense he had of her
brother’s horsemanship.

He evidently had an idea of offering her some refreshment, for he
looked from her to the bottles of spirit and coloured cordials on the
shelf, and from them back again to her, but apparently without being
able to make up his mind to so hazardous a proceeding.

As we were all standing outside the inn debating how to conduct the
search, a dog-cart drove up.

“Let me see, I am right for the Grange, am I not?” asked a voice.

“Yes,” I answered, “but whom do you want at the Grange?”

“Miss Gascoyne.”

“I am Miss Gascoyne.”

There was a silence. The man in the dog-cart was evidently somewhat
taken aback. He was saved from further awkwardness by the character of
the woman he had to deal with.

“I am afraid something has happened. What is it?”

“Your brother has had an accident.”

“Is he hurt?”

“I am afraid so.”

The answer was inconclusive, and it was obviously intended that it
should be.

“Seriously?”

“I am afraid so.”

The answer was still lacking in finality, and Miss Gascoyne guessed
the worst.

We all stood round, the men looking stupid but concerned.

“Will you take me to him, please?”

“I came to fetch you.”

“Will you come too, Mr. Rank?”

“Of course.” I turned to the landlord’s wife, who had now joined us.
“Can you find a shawl for Miss Gascoyne? She has no hat.”

The landlady disappeared, and returned with a white woollen shawl,
which she was taking out of tissue paper.

“When was he found?” asked Miss Gascoyne, as we drove rapidly away,
leaving the little group outside the public-house to discuss the
matter.

“About two hours and a half ago.”

“Where?”

The doctor explained, throwing into his account as much insinuation as
he could of the worst. I don’t know at what particular moment Miss
Gascoyne grasped that her brother was dead, but it was apparent before
we reached our destination that she had realised the truth.

He had been carried to a farmhouse, from whence they had sent for the
doctor.

“I am afraid he was kicked by his horse. I cannot for the life of me
imagine how it could have happened to so fine a horseman.”

The doctor ended a little lamely. Young Gascoyne’s propensities were
too well known for miles round his home for anyone to be ignorant of
them.

I felt somewhat uncomfortable as we turned down the lane where I had
left Harry Gascoyne. The doctor made no remark as we passed the spot
where I knew he had been found.

I was full of curiosity as to how his sister would behave.

As we descended from the dog-cart, the doctor turned to her.

“I hope I have made myself clear.”

Miss Gascoyne stood silent for a few seconds, struggling for
self-control. Then she answered quietly:

“Quite. You mean that my brother is dead?”

The doctor nodded his head gravely.

It was curious evidence of the apartness of Miss Gascoyne’s character
that the woman of the house, a buxom, garrulous body, made no attempt
at comfort. She at once realised that it would have been an intrusion.

Miss Gascoyne went upstairs with the doctor. She was not away long,
and when she returned I saw that she must give way soon, or a mental
catastrophe would ensue. Her features were rigid.

I went upstairs at her request.

All signs of violence had already been removed, and he lay as if
asleep. Any indications of vice and intemperance had disappeared, and
he looked very boyish and beautiful. The doctor was in the room.

“I don’t quite see,” he said, in a low voice, “how a mere kick or two
could have inflicted such injuries. I don’t mean, of course, that
kicks could not have caused his death, but the blows seem as if they
had been struck by a blunt instrument, directed with less velocity
than would have been the case with a horse’s hoof. I am waiting for a
colleague, and then we must make a serious examination.”

I murmured that I was no authority. I could not help reflecting how
much Harry Gascoyne had been the gainer by dying when he did. Instead
of growing into a debauched, worn-out old man, his physical casket lay
before us in all the freshness of its youth and beauty. He would leave
beautiful instead of ugly memories.

Yes, it was well he had died. His sister might continue to worship him
and to preserve her illusions.

She returned to the Grange, and I, having left her to the care of the
old housekeeper, went to the inn, though it struck me as being
somewhat ridiculous to observe the conventions at such a time.

I did not believe for one moment that the blows which had struck young
Gascoyne were from the horse’s hoofs. Before leaving the house,
however, I went round to the stables. There was no one about, and the
mare was by this time as quiet as a lamb.

I examined her hoofs carefully. There was not the least trace of
blood—at any rate, not observable to myself. If there were any traces,
they must be microscopic.

I sat down on an upturned pail and reflected. I should like to save
Nat Holway—that is to say, if he had not already given himself up,
which with a nature such as his was quite possible.

Would it help him to smear the horse’s hind hoofs with blood? It was
worth trying. Where was I to get the blood from? There was only one
source, and that was myself.

I am not brave about blood, but the occasion demanded urgent measures.
I took out my pocket-knife, and deliberately drew the blade across the
little finger of my left hand. I then smeared the hoofs of the horse
and, binding my finger, left the stable. The dawn was just beginning
to lay ghostly hands on the garment of night. The stars trembled and
burned pale in the growing light.

Through the firs the coming day gave almost the effect of an expanse
of water beyond. In the cheerless air there was a touch of clamminess
which suggested rain, whilst heavy, sulky-looking clouds were driven
slowly towards the east.

I walked with a melancholy step along the sandy path that led through
the plantation. What would poor Janet Gray do? I made a point of
letting my sympathies have as much play as was compatible with my own
interest. As a matter of fact, her situation was slightly bettered,
excepting that her lover was dead—than which no greater grief can come
to any human being. But at the same time she would receive a much
larger meed of pity than would otherwise have been her lot.

If Nat Holway were fool enough to give himself up it would be
unpleasant, although I could not forget that even if he had not
actually accomplished his purpose, it had been his full intention to
murder Harry Gascoyne. Still, he was a fine fellow, and it was not
nice to think of lives unnecessarily wasted. The next afternoon I
would go over to Copsley and reconnoitre. I must confess that I found
the whole thing very exciting, especially as I myself stood in
absolutely no danger.

On returning to the inn I found the landlord waiting up for me, a
great feat for a man who was usually somewhat heavy with alcohol. He
plied me with questions, and appeared terribly shocked at the sad
catastrophe.

“Such an open-handed young gentleman, sir, and his sister doting on
him as she did. Well, there, you never know. The Lord has His own way
of doing things.”

He sighed and looked as if to say that were it not for this undeniable
fact he might be prevailed upon to take a hand in the management of
the universe.

I lay open-eyed, tossing from side to side. Miss Gascoyne stood
between myself and sleep. Although I could put an irrevocable fact
like death out of my mind I could not dismiss a living grief so
easily. I knew that she was capable of terrible suffering. Her brother
had been her all. At the same time, while feeling acutely for her I
could not help reflecting what a much better match she would now be.
Sixteen hundred a year was not great wealth, but when combined with a
woman like Miss Gascoyne it was a prize worth having.

I believe there is not the character, however elevated, which does not
at a moment of supreme grief calculate the particular degree of
benefit or disadvantage it will obtain from it.

It was noon when I walked over to the Grange to ask how Miss Gascoyne
was. The servant said her mistress particularly desired to be informed
of my arrival, and I went into the inner hall and waited. She came
down almost immediately. I was shocked at the change in her
appearance. She had evidently been weeping bitterly, and for a moment
I would have given anything to restore her brother to her. The
weakness was only momentary, however, and after all it would have been
doing her a very bad turn.

She appeared to derive a certain degree of comfort and help from my
presence.

“It seems a little sad, Mr. Rank, that although we have so many
relations there is hardly one to whom I could write at this
emergency.”

This was a great opportunity to please Mr. Gascoyne by obtaining her
consent to send for him. There were also other schemes in my head,
nebulous as yet, which such a reconciliation would assist materially.

“I should have thought,” I said gently, “that your father’s brother
would be the proper person to send for under the circumstances.”

She looked at me in surprise. The idea had evidently not struck her,
and she became thoughtful.

“I am afraid he would not come.”

“I think he would. I know it hurt his feelings somewhat that when his
son died neither you nor your brother wrote to him.”

“He told you so?”

“Yes.”

“I will send a telegram.”

“Let me take it.”

She went to her desk and wrote several.

“The groom can take them,” she said, as I rose.

“No, let me. I shall be quicker on my bicycle, and it will be
something to do.”

“It is very poor entertainment for you.”

“Anything I can do to serve you. Your brother and I were great
friends.”

Most of the telegrams were conventional intimations of the news to
relatives and friends. That to Mr. Gascoyne ran:

“My brother has been killed by an accident. I am in great trouble;
would you come to me?”

My plan was that Miss Gascoyne should make friends with her uncle and
aunt and that we four should form a harmonious quartet, and that
finally I should marry her, and Mr. Gascoyne should leave us his
money.

I fully realised all my own disabilities in Miss Gascoyne’s eyes. The
Semitic taint in my appearance could not possibly be a recommendation,
and my parentage would certainly be a bar. There was no disguising the
fact that my father was not, to the world’s way of thinking, a
gentleman, and from what I could remember I was inclined in strict
honesty to agree with the world.

I was not so far even the adopted heir of Mr. Gascoyne, and I was
running a grave risk in introducing a considerably nearer blood
relation bearing his own name into the house. I did not fear that Mr.
Gascoyne would do anything less for me than he had intended, but he
might do considerably less than I had intended. He was just the sort
of man to admire Miss Gascoyne. Still, should I fail in my scheme, she
already had an ample fortune, and was no claimant for relief. I sent
off the telegram, but did not return to the house. I gathered that
Miss Gascoyne would wish to be alone, and contented myself with
sending over a message that I was at the inn should she want me, and
that I should remain there till Mr. Gascoyne arrived. She sent back a
grateful note thanking me, and asking me to come over in the evening.

In the afternoon I mounted my bicycle and rode to Copsley.

The little village lay still as death in the burning sun. The boys and
young men were probably lounging about the adjacent lanes and fields,
whilst the older people were taking their Sunday afternoon rest.

The blacksmith’s shop was shut, the great worm-eaten doors barred with
a massive piece of iron. The house next door, with its trim garden and
green shutters, which evidenced the prosperity of the Grays, was in
silence.

Or was I mistaken?

I was wheeling my machine, and I paused with my back to the house and
bent down, ostensibly to set something defective right. There was the
sound of faint sobbing in the house behind me. At the same time I
heard footsteps coming along the street. I looked up. It was Nat
Holway. His face was impassive, but his features were set. Almost at
the same moment the door of the house opened, and Mr. Gray came out.

Apparently he was expecting Nat Holway. They went into the forge
together. Old Gray’s face was white and stern.

I guessed that they had an appointment, and were keeping it there in
order that they might talk undisturbed. I wondered if by any chance
Nat Holway was offering to take Janet’s shame upon his shoulders. He
was the sort of man to do it. Really, if such a thing did happen, and
the murderer were not suspected, what a convenient settlement it would
be. I should have obtained what I wanted, Janet Gray would in time be
happy, and Miss Gascoyne would remain in ignorance of her brother’s
peccadillo. It is certainly rare that matters move so easily along the
ways of common-sense.

I rode back to the inn to find a telegram from Mr. Gascoyne to his
niece which she had sent over for me to see. It was to say that he
would come by the evening train. There were only four trains to
Copsley Station on Sunday—two each way—and the London train did not
arrive till ten o’clock. I saw her in the early evening. She seemed
worn out with grief, and there was, I thought, a quite tragic
loneliness in her appearance.

It pleased her to talk of her dead brother, and, sitting there saying
all the nice things I could about him, and full of a real and genuine
sympathy for her, I could hardly realise that it was I who had knelt
in the dusky lane with my fingers on the dying youth’s throat.

“He had a great admiration for you,” she said, with a faint smile. “He
thought you the cleverest person he had ever met.”

“His was one of the sunniest natures; no one could help loving him.”

“He was spoilt, of course. My father spoilt him terribly. It was not
to be wondered at if he was a little wild.”

I allowed her to talk on till I rose to go and meet Mr. Gascoyne.

“I don’t know why,” she said, as she came out into the lane with me,
“but I have always imagined my uncle to be a very hard man. I read
‘Nicholas Nickleby’ when I was a little girl, and I could not help
drawing a comparison between my father, who was like Nicholas’s
father, and lived in the country, and my uncle, who, of course,
represented Ralph Nickleby.”

I smiled. “You will find Mr. Gascoyne very different from that. He is
much softened of late, but I don’t think that he has ever been a
miser, even if at times he has carried the principle of justice to the
verge of hardness.”

I was thinking of the circumstances of my first appeal to him.

When I left her I went at once to the station, and, as the train was
late, had some time to wait.

There were one or two yokels in the tiny waiting-room, and the
station-master addressed one of them as he passed through from his
little ivy-covered cottage to the ticket-office.

“Sad thing, this, about Mr. Gascoyne, Edward.”

The young man in question answered slowly:

“Yes. They say as ’is ’orse kicked him to death.”

“That’s strange—very strange. Was the horse bad-tempered?”

“Not that I know of, and I’ve shod the mare often enough.”

“They say as Miss Gascoyne is powerful cut up.”

“That’s very likely; yer see, she doted on him.”

I scrutinised young Gray, the last speaker, narrowly. His manner
betrayed no indication that he was in any way aware of his sister’s
condition.

As Mr. Gascoyne descended from the train he pressed my hand warmly.

“This is very terrible,” I said—“very terrible.”

“Tell me, how did it happen?”

As we drove towards the Grange I detailed the event as well as I
could.

“You think the horse kicked him to death—a horse that was fond of him?
That is somewhat strange.”

“I don’t say it is so, sir. That is what has been surmised.”

“When do they hold the inquest?”

“To-morrow.”

“My wife is shocked beyond measure. If my niece had expressed the
least wish for her to do so, she would have come too.”

I did not answer. I could not say how Miss Gascoyne would welcome the
idea of her aunt assuming the role of a near relation.

“I am very touched at her sending for me—very touched indeed. Is the
body at the Grange?”

“No; it is at a farmhouse some miles off. It will be brought home
after the inquest.”

“Quite so.”

We reached the Grange.

“If you don’t mind, sir, I will get back to town. I would sooner. I
don’t think I can be of any further use.”

He did not press me to remain, and I went back to town carrying
messages for his managing clerk. I did not witness the meeting between
Miss Gascoyne and himself, but it must have been quite satisfactory,
for he stayed away over a week, and I learnt that Mrs. Gascoyne had
joined them.

I fancied that Miss Gascoyne would be rather surprised at the dignity
and well-bred restraint of the tradesman’s daughter, and would find it
a little difficult to account for her father’s prejudice; in fact, his
objection could not fail to strike her as having something in it of
unreasoning snobbery.

I would have given a great deal to be at the inquest, but although
there was no particular reason why I should not be, I thought Mr.
Gascoyne might deem it a little officious. Neither did I go down to
the funeral, but wrote a sympathetic note and sent a wreath. I let it
fully appear that my reason for not going was diffidence, and a desire
not to assume too intimate an attitude.

The morning of Mr. Gascoyne’s return he called me into his office.

“Close the door, Israel.”

He motioned me to a chair.

“Did you see any account of the inquest?”

“No, sir; I have been waiting for you to tell me.” As a matter of
fact, I had followed the case most carefully in the papers.

“It appeared that there was a serious doubt as to how my nephew
received his injuries.”

“Really?”

“Yes. In the first place, both doctors were a little surprised that
they should have caused death at all. The whole case became quite
complicated. There were distinct traces of blood on the horse’s hoof,
and yet one of the doctors absolutely refused to admit that the
injuries could have been inflicted by the horse at all.”

“How very extraordinary!”

“Did you at any time exchange confidences with my nephew on love
affairs?”

I swiftly reflected. Had he the least proof of our having done so? It
would not do to give a direct answer.

“I dare say we did, sir, but I cannot remember anything definite.”

“Some letters were found in his pocket.”

I almost started. How was it that it had never occurred to me to
search young Gascoyne’s pockets?

“Were they love-letters?”

“Yes.”

“It is not very unusual for a young fellow of his age.”

“No, and I am afraid that what they contained is also not unusual. It
appears that he had accomplished the ruin of a girl in a neighbouring
village.”

I looked thoughtful. “Do you mean to suggest that there is a mystery?”

“I am afraid there is. I cannot help thinking that the doctor who
refused to accept the theory of his having been killed by the horse
was right.”

“Why did they not call in a third doctor?”

“They did, and he was evidently under the influence of the man who
believed in the horse theory.”

“What was the verdict?”

I had forborne to satisfy myself on this point in order to be able to
ask the question with easy unconcern.

“Accidental death.”

I was astonished, but the country bumpkins on the jury had, I
imagined, made up their minds before the inquest that he had been
kicked by his horse.

“Were the letters read in court?”

“No. They were considered unnecessary, and no one thought they bore on
the issue.”

“Do you think they did?”

“Decidedly I do,” answered Mr. Gascoyne. “Depend upon it, there was
foul play. I talked to the doctor who would not admit the horse
theory, after the case was over, and he was quite positive the
injuries could not have been inflicted by a horse’s hoof.”

“Who was the girl?” I asked.

“Well, I do not think it is quite right to disclose her name. I had a
talk with her father, who was very distant and said the matter would
be best settled by saying nothing more about it. I don’t know what he
meant.”

“Was the girl’s name by any chance Janet Gray?”

Mr. Gascoyne looked at me in surprise.

“That was her name, but how did you know?”

“Harry Gascoyne spoke to me once or twice about her, and I wondered at
the time from something he said whether he had not made rather a mess
of things.”

“Yes, I am afraid we men are very selfish, that is, until we have
wives and daughters of our own. The possession of sisters does not
seem to instil the same sense of responsibility to woman-kind.”

“Does Miss Gascoyne know of this?”

“No; unless the matter develops further I do not think it necessary to
inform her.”

“What did the police think of the affair?”

“I fancy they are quite prepared to accept the horse theory.”

“Then the matter is settled?”

“Except for the trouble of the poor girl. It appears that he actually
promised to marry her.”

“He was generous-hearted enough for anything,” I answered, with
calculated impulsiveness.

“Her father asked me to give my word that the matter would not go any
further, so you will remember that you hold a secret that affects
three human beings at least.”

“I shall of course be as silent as the grave.”

He began to open his correspondence, and I rose to leave the room.

“Oh, by the way, my wife and my niece have struck up quite a
friendship. My wife remains at the Grange, and I shall go down there
again for a few days next week.”

I looked pleased.

“I believe,” he added, smiling, “you have been indulging in some
diplomacy at our expense. Don’t you think my niece is a beautiful
woman?”

“I think everyone would admit that.”

“I expect she will make a very brilliant match.”

I went out. I knew quite well why this last remark had been made, and
smiled inwardly. Mr. Gascoyne had thought gently to dissuade me from
indulging in hopes which were improbable of fulfilment. He could not
know how carefully I had calculated all the obstacles that stood in
the way of my success.

As I returned to my desk I found myself murmuring the word _two_. I
had the most difficult part of my task still before me, but so far the
two opening campaigns had been brilliant successes. I wondered if the
Gascoyne family in general realised how much nearer I was to the
succession. Probably with the exception of Mr. Gascoyne and his niece
they had no idea of my existence.

I took out the genealogical tree and studied it carefully, although
there was little need of this, as I could have passed an examination
in the entire history of the Gascoynes up to date at any moment.

There were now four lives between me and the object of my ambition.

My great-uncle Henry, who was now very nearly ninety years of age,
lived somewhere in the North of England. It was not necessary to
consider him in any way. He was a widower without children. There was
Ughtred, the uncle of the present peer, still a man in the prime of
life. He might yet marry and have a family. He was devoted to good
living and had a reputation as a dilettante. I had never seen him, but
he had held office at Court, and was altogether rather an important
person.

My difficulties would come when I arrived at the main branch of the
family, and I reserved them for the final stroke. I should then be
obviously near the succession and might be suspected of motives. A
great many eyes would be upon me, and there would probably be a young
baby and his perfectly healthy father to deal with. I began to realise
that so far I had merely nibbled at my task.

It was advisable to give myself rest for a few months, as I discovered
that after each campaign my nerve was apt to be slightly affected. I
had proved to my own satisfaction that the dictum, ‘murder will out,’
was invented to frighten mankind, had in fact been set up as a
perpetual bogey. Nat Holway’s guilt might be discovered, but the
tracing of my anonymous letter would be an almost impossible task.

I was very anxious to know how Janet Gray’s affair was progressing,
and rather hoped I might be asked to stay at the Grange for a day or
two. I gathered as time went on that the friendship between Miss
Gascoyne and her aunt had grown stronger and stronger. Mr. Gascoyne
told me that their attachment was a great relief to him, that the
companionship of her niece had to a great extent dissipated his wife’s
melancholy, and that having a common sorrow they were very much in
sympathy.

“They admire each other, and it is the dignified and warm friendship
of two women to whom respect is essential. By the way, Israel, the
girl Janet Gray is married.”

“Indeed?”

“Yes, to a young miller called Nat Holway. He is very steady and very
well-to-do. I almost wondered——” He pulled himself up abruptly.

“Yes, sir?” I queried.

“Nothing, nothing.”

I knew what he had intended to say, and fervently wished that he would
get rid of his vague suspicions.

I was glad, therefore, when he continued: “I have often wondered
whether my nephew may not have had a fight with some admirer of Janet
Gray, a fight that ended unexpectedly in a tragedy.”

“Do you intend to pursue the matter?”

“No,” he answered, energetically. “I think when a man undertakes the
seduction of a girl he must look for violence from those whose
feelings he outrages or from those whose hearths he pollutes. I could
not if it were my own son bring the avenger to so-called justice. I
may be wrong, but I believe that if my niece were asked, she would
agree with me.”

I breathed a sigh of relief, for they were not precisely the
sentiments I had expected from him.



Chapter XI

I had reached quite a new phase of my career. The boy who had set out
in life from the little house at Clapham with a distinctly suburban
appearance was now hardly recognisable. I was twenty-three years of
age. I knew that I had a certain romantic distinction of appearance,
for I had been constantly reminded of the fact by women of society who
made it their business to secure as good-looking cavaliers as
possible. Someone had once said in my hearing that I was like the
young Disraeli. Poor Lady Pebworth, in beginning what she conceived to
be the patronage of an obscure youth, had been caught in her own trap,
and had thrown modesty and virtue to the winds in an overmastering
infatuation; she would likewise have discarded prudence had I been in
the mind to allow her to do so. I am quite aware of the charge of
coxcombry which will be made against me for writing in such a way
about my conquests, but when a man sets forth to tell the history of
his life he must make up his mind to be impervious to two accusations
which are sure to be thrown at the head of the truthful memoirist,
namely, those of vanity and exaggeration. When we reflect that no
novelist or diarist has ever yet dared to paint a truly analytical
picture of a human career it is evident how amazingly difficult such a
performance must be, and there are few who would be willing to risk
the fury of mankind by giving an accurate description of their lives
and actions.

Jean Jacques Rousseau certainly made a pretence of doing so, but we
read his incomplete memorials with a solemn wink and our tongue in our
cheek. His dissipations and weaknesses, which he parades with such an
ostentation of candour, he knows are not such as to bring down any
great obloquy. Perhaps there is philosophy at the foundation of such
an attitude on the part of society at large. An absolute ingenuousness
on the subject of our failings might breed too broad a tolerance to
suit the present views of humanity. I myself have no intention of
admitting the public into the inner sanctuary where dwell my most
esoteric emotions. The philosopher wisely avoids the company of those
who, indifferent to the opportunities of learning, are ready to
practise the habits of street urchins at a sight foreign to the daily
life of the streets. Jean Jacques’ drama was always legitimate.

Lady Pebworth undoubtedly was the victim of a great passion.
Fortunately, she was possessed of a lord and master who was of an
unsuspicious nature, otherwise I am afraid that in spite of all my
discretion she would have landed me in the Divorce Court. The Peeress
and the stockbroker’s clerk would have made a meal for many a prurient
appetite.

My income was three hundred pounds a year, more or less, and with the
instincts of my race I had begun to speculate in a safe, quiet sort of
way.

I made no boast of the nearness of my relation to the Gascoyne family
in such society as I obtained entrance to. I was anxious for the
matter to remain unknown.

I woke one morning to read in the social intelligence that Lady
Gascoyne had been safely delivered of a son. The news was not the
shock it might have been, as I had known for some time that she was in
an interesting condition. The child would have to be removed as well
as his father.

It was a task that might well tax the ingenuity of any man. I thought
the matter over carefully, day after day. I knew their house, which
overlooked the Green Park, and sat for hours gazing at the windows as
if they might be expected to furnish inspiration.

Lord Gascoyne was now twenty-six years of age. Without being in any
way a prig—in fact, he was a man of some gallantry—he had a great
sense of his responsibilities, and was leaving the Guards in order to
manage his huge estates the better. He and his wife were little heard
of. Despite the fact of her American birth, she was the genuine great
lady as opposed to the pinchbeck imposition. Her happiness was not
measured by the amount of social noise she could make. Everything
about her and her husband was correct, and with the exception of the
extreme good looks of both probably somewhat dull.

They belonged to the inner sanctuary of English aristocracy, and I
could not at the moment see how I was to scale the fortress of their
exclusiveness. I knew that they had been perfectly ready to entertain
and make much of the young Gascoynes. Harry Gascoyne had told me as
much, but this was a very different thing from welcoming the son of
the Hebrew commercial traveller. They might not be so easy to
conciliate as Miss Gascoyne.

Lord and Lady Gascoyne’s entertainments were not made a feature of in
the newspapers. It was a privilege to attend them, and the entrée to
Lady Gascoyne’s drawing-room was a passport to any society.

Lady Pebworth, I knew, visited them, and had been a guest at
Hammerton, but I did not think it very probable she would be able to
introduce me, and I was not quite sure that I cared about owing my
introduction to her.



Chapter XII

Although I had from motives of policy given up the idea of making
Sibella my wife, I was none the less somewhat overcome at receiving an
invitation to her wedding. Grahame Hallward and I had lunch together
in the City the day I received it.

“What do you think, Israel? Lionel has asked me to be his best man,”
he said.

“Are you going to?”

“Well, I told him that I thought it was rather silly for the bride’s
brother to be best man, and I asked him whether there was not someone
else. He got quite annoyed, and so did Sibella. He was angry, I
believe, chiefly because he could not think of a friend as a
substitute. As a matter of fact, I don’t think he has many friends.”

“I don’t understand him,” I said. “He goes about a great deal, and
knows some very decent people, and yet the men don’t like him.”

“Women do, though, don’t they?”

“I suppose so.”

“I’m sorry for Sibella, Israel—I am really. Of course, she won’t
suffer so much as other women might when she finds him out, because
she has no heart.”

“Do you really think that, Grahame?”

“Sorry to say I do. Of course, I would not say such a thing to anybody
else, but you’re almost like one of us.”

I gave him an affectionate glance. I was certainly very fond of
Grahame.

“You should ask him if he would not like me to be his best man,” I
said.

We both laughed.

“I should think he rather objects to my coming to the wedding at all.
I’m coming, all the same.”

Grahame said nothing, and I guessed that there had been some
discussion on the subject. I knew that Lionel Holland was not by any
means above the vulgarity of showing temper should I be asked against
his wish.

“Come and see us on Sunday. Lionel won’t be there, and Sibella
particularly told me to ask you.”

“I’ll come,” I said. I wondered why Sibella was anxious to see me.
“You’ll be awfully dull at home without her,” I added.

“Yes; she may not have much heart, but at the same time she’s jolly
good company.”

“Yes, that’s exactly the expression. Even when we were children she
always kept things going.”

We both grew a little quiet and thoughtful. I had had delightful times
in the Hallward schoolroom with Grahame and Sibella, but I had
travelled far since then. I was fighting also against a great and
torturing jealousy. I was by practice enabled to keep this feeling
well under control, but it had a habit of having a hasty nibble at my
heart-strings when I was not on the alert.

Sibella received me with more subdued sweetness than I had ever known
her display.

“You are getting on, Israel, aren’t you?”

“Oh, I don’t know; I’m just making a living, that is all.”

“Why, you know that you are quite an important person now.”

I was surprised to find that no one else came in, and more surprised
when she proposed that we three should spend the evening round the
schoolroom fire, as we used to do. I began to gather from Sibella’s
manner that she was not looking forward to her marriage without
misgivings. That she was in love with Lionel in a sort of way I had no
doubt, but the price that was to be paid for a few months of ecstasy
had begun to dawn upon her. Woman-like, she could not forbear to count
the cost. She had never been ignorant of my feelings towards her, and
from the day Lionel first entered the house there had been a
constraint whenever we were left alone. Such a constraint fell upon us
when Grahame, having remembered that he had a message for a friend who
lived a little way off, left us for half an hour.

I believe it was at that moment that Sibella began to develop a vague
feeling that from every point of view she had made a mistake. In fact,
the unexpected happened, as it always does. The absolutely—from the
worldly point of view—immoral and incongruous came about as if swiftly
driven forward by some occult forces, and she was in my arms sobbing
hysterically and erotically, without either of us quite knowing how it
had happened.

I had thirsted for her lithe, sweet figure and the caressing of her
golden hair so long that I was swept away and found myself murmuring:

“I have not given you up, Sibella.”

She hardly gathered what I meant, and I put her arms round my neck.
Her mouth had always been to my mind her chief charm, and when I found
my lips pressed against its large, sweet lines—which should have
ciphered a broad, generous nature—I lost my head—that is, if I had had
any desire to keep it.

Old Mr. and Mrs. Hallward dozed away in their armchairs by the
drawing-room fire. Miss Hallward was writing her interminable Sunday
letters in the library. I have no doubt the house outside looked just
as respectable and unemotional to Grahame when he returned to it as
when he went out of it, but, all the same, I was wondering when he
rejoined us if Sibella would think it necessary to break off her
marriage at the last moment rather than marry a man she had betrayed.
She might do so, although in my wildest delirium I had kept some vague
powers of caution and calculation, and had concluded that morality
with Sibella meant self-interest.

I drove home to my rooms in St. James’s laughing with triumph. Poor
Lionel Holland would have all the appearance of victory with none of
its reality.

Had Sibella been a woman of ordinary susceptibilities, I might have
received a letter from her the next morning imploring me to bury the
incident, accusing herself wildly, and vowing to make a model wife;
but the elusive one—as I had named her to myself—was too clever to
commit herself to paper, and if her marriage took place she would have
it conducted without risks.

The marriage did take place, and I went as a guest. If it was bad
taste on my part, it was entirely a question between Sibella and
myself. She certainly betrayed no resentment. She had the grace to be
very pale and subdued, which gave indications that there might be a
certain leaven of conscience somewhere. Holland took my
congratulations civilly enough. I think he was feeling really happy,
so much are human beings capable of being imposed on, and so little
can we make sure of appearances.

They evidently both looked forward to emerging from suburban society,
for they were to return from their honeymoon to a flat in Mount
Street, although Mr. and Mrs. Holland had wished them to settle down
close to their house at Clapham.

“I was not going to agree to that,” Sibella had said. “I want to say
good-bye to Clapham for good and for all. If it had been Hampstead, I
should not have minded so much, but Clapham—ugh! it gets more and more
sordid every year.”

I did not suppose I should have the entrée to their establishment if
Lionel could help it, but I meant to make an attempt, all the same.
Sibella was necessary to me.

I suffered a good deal from jealousy the first few days of her married
life, but there is a merciful dispensation of Providence which blunts
the keenest pangs of wounded love very rapidly when the inevitable has
taken place, however sharp they may remain when sustained by hope.



Chapter XIII

“My niece is staying with us, Israel,” said Mr. Gascoyne one afternoon
as he was leaving the office. “Will you dine with us on Friday
evening?”

I said I should be delighted. Mr. Gascoyne and his wife had stayed at
the Grange till the summer was almost over, and I knew that Miss
Gascoyne was going to shut the house up for the winter, and that there
was a possibility of her selling it in the spring.

She looked very stately and beautiful in her deep mourning, and was
evidently glad to see me. We were together for fully a quarter of an
hour before Mr. and Mrs. Gascoyne came down, and she talked quite
freely and unconstrainedly of her brother.

The more I saw of her, the more I was struck by her absolute lack of
pose in any small acceptation of the word. It positively gave me a
sense of personal dignity to be with her.

“I am thinking of selling the Grange,” she said. “So long as there was
my brother it seemed to me a certain sort of duty that the offshoots
of a great family should keep up an appearance and have a fair country
residence.” Then she smiled. “I am afraid, however, that my views are
changing. I don’t look upon the Gascoynes as quite such great people
as I used to do, though I still think that if one bears a great name
one owes it a duty.”

“I am half a Jew,” I said, boldly, “and as an Oriental I have a great
respect for caste and authority.”

“Do you think that is why the Jews succeed so well?”

“Yes; their chief aim is to remain at peace with the powers that be,
and as Orientals they are satisfied that authority in this country
abuses its privileges very little. They have no craving for more
liberty.”

“They are a curious race.”

“I am not a Jew by religion, you know. I was baptised a Christian.”

She smiled.

“I don’t wish to be rude, but is that as far as your Christianity has
reached?”

“My mother was a very religious woman. That is, she tested everything
by her conscience, and always held that that was an unfailing
standard.”

It was really quite wonderful on what a high platform I could conduct
a conversation.

Mr. and Mrs. Gascoyne came in, and we went to dinner. The affection
that had arisen between these two women was quite extraordinary, and
it was surprising to see Miss Gascoyne yielding to her aunt something
of the deference of a daughter, although I am certain she would have
rejected the insinuation that she could ever put anyone in the place
of the mother she had idolised.

The conversation turned on the Gascoyne family.

“Do you know,” said Mr. Gascoyne, “I was quite astonished to find how
near our friend Israel is to the succession.”

It was an awkward remark, and Mr. Gascoyne evidently felt it to be so
as soon as he had made it. The subject was allowed to drop at the
moment, but Mr. Gascoyne revived it when we were alone.

“I can’t think how I came to make such a foolish remark, Israel. It
cannot have failed to remind them both of what you have gained by
their loss.”

This was exactly what I feared.

“I cannot be said to have gained much. Lord Gascoyne has a son and
heir.”

“Let us consider. If Lord Gascoyne and his son were to die, you
succeed as heir to your mother; that is, of course, when the two Henry
Gascoynes, Ughtred, and myself, are out of the way—and none of us
count for much. You see, the succession does not reach the female heir
till it has been carried down to the last male heir. Rather hard on
the women of the female lines, but so it is.”

“I am afraid, sir, it will be my lot to drudge along in the City all
my life.”

“You are not the sort of person who ends as a drudge, Israel. Besides,
go on as you are doing, and who knows what may happen.”

I guessed by the intonation of his voice that he was considering
whether he should tell me more of his intentions.

When we returned to the drawing-room I played and sang to them till
late, and left the house high in the good graces of both women. From
that moment my position in the house at South Kensington became a much
more intimate one. Even two women as independent by nature as Mrs.
Gascoyne and her niece found it pleasant and convenient to have a
young man about who was ready to take so much trouble off their hands.
This was, of course, not so apparent till the first months of mourning
were over, but when Miss Gascoyne, who was devoted to music and art,
began to go to concerts and picture-galleries I was very useful.

I learned that Lord and Lady Gascoyne had called on Mrs. Gascoyne and
her niece, and that the three were going to dine with them.

I sincerely hoped that my name would not be mentioned, as I had no
wish for the head of the family to know of my existence till I had
decided on my plan of action.

I had been inquiring cautiously about Ughtred Gascoyne, and had made a
point of coming across him several times in the districts he haunted.
He was a very good-looking man, with apparently no such mentality as
provoked restlessness. He enjoyed his life thoroughly, for all I could
see. He had been in the Guards. He had also sat in the House of
Commons for a limited period, and had utterly declined to repeat the
experiment. In fact, the two ventures, together with a short period of
Court life, had in his own eyes been activity enough, and he had
settled down to a life of ease. Having a good income of his own, and
being welcome at Hammerton as often as he chose to go there, existence
was altogether a pleasant affair. Still, fifty-five is young for a man
nowadays, and he might very well marry and have a whole family of
children. Selfish and apparently confirmed bachelors do very often in
middle age perform a complete right-about-face, and end up as the
benignant fathers of a whole troop of boys and girls. Ughtred Gascoyne
had now arrived at that age when a man may by some such shock as
hearing himself described as “that old bore” be driven into matrimony.

At present there did not seem to be much chance of it. There was a
woman in his life, however. She was an actress, Catherine Goodsall, a
woman of birth, who moved in very good society, and who, being neither
a great tragedienne nor a great comedienne, managed to earn a salary
larger than could be achieved by cleverer and more legitimate artistes
on account of the extraordinary _chic_ and distinction she could
import into the delineation of smart society women. She was so much
the real thing, so entirely free from the metallic artificiality of
the usual impersonator of such characters, that managers sought her
continually.

She had a husband somewhere, poor soul, a man who had been in the
Navy, a blackguard who had been untrue to the dearest traditions of
the British tar by laying his hand on a female otherwise than in the
way of kindness; in fact, he had beaten her, and Ughtred Gascoyne had
thrashed him, and, strange to relate, the wife had been grateful.

The husband had then disappeared. She had been unable to obtain a
divorce, but society, recognising the plucky way in which she had
managed to earn her own living, accepted her intimate friendship with
Ughtred Gascoyne for the innocent affair it pretended to be.

Her position, perhaps, had also something to do with the fact that she
had a keen tongue and a ready wit. Her tongue would have been a weapon
to be dreaded had it not been that she had the superlatively rare
quality of using it with discretion. Her somewhat unique social
position earned her the envy of her fellow artistes, the majority of
whom retain such footing as they have in society on sufferance, their
insecurity by no means being caused by their profession; for, were it
not for their calling, the majority of the theatrical sisterhood, even
of the higher ranks, would still be moving in their own proper
slatternly or suburban circles.

Perhaps it would be possible to reach the Honourable Ughtred through
her. She was not above the weakness common to most women of fashion of
possessing a craving for new male friends. I chose an opportunity when
Ughtred Gascoyne was out of town to obtain an introduction to her.
This was not a difficult matter. I kept my eyes on the advertisements
of charitable performances and bazaars to which she was very generous
in contributing her services. A bazaar would be the thing, being the
sort of entertainment at which it was fairly easy to force an
introduction.

I had not long to wait. She was announced to hold a stall at a
fashionable bazaar. The particular object of it I forget, but I
remember that it was at a town-hall a mile or two from Piccadilly
Circus. She had charge of a photographic stall, and I had my
photograph taken in such a variety of positions that long before the
operation was over, and aided by the mention of one or two mutual
friends, we had become sufficiently acquainted for me to remain and
help her. Nothing, as I had calculated, could have been more likely to
bring about a rapid intimacy, and before I left I had been asked to go
and see her.

She had a small house on the north side of the Park, and I made up my
mind to call on Sunday afternoon, but before that day I received a
note asking me to come to lunch.

“A great many people drop in on Sunday afternoon in the winter,” she
said when I arrived. “I should probably see nothing of you, and new
friends always interest me. People think that a bad trait, don’t they,
whereas it is nothing of the kind.”

“It certainly is not. It shows a progressive mind—that is, if there is
no premature protestation.”

“Exactly. New friends should have just as many fresh points of
interest as, say, a picture-gallery. I love to watch new temperaments;
they blaze and change like sunsets.”

“You are quite right; but I hope this does not infer that you tire of
your friends easily.”

“Not of the residuum. The majority pass, of course. One would miss an
immense amount of good comradeship if everything which cannot be
lasting is to be avoided.”

“You are not fickle?”

“Not in the least. We all have our inner sanctuary, and consequently
we have our esoteric and exoteric friendships, and the lookers-on make
mistakes as to which is which.”

“That is very true. There is nothing in which people are so much
deceived about each other as in their emotions. Human nature is so
much more many-sided than the world is willing to admit.”

“You believe that the good are not as good as they would have us
believe, nor the bad as bad?”

“Exactly.”

She was a woman worth talking to, and I roused myself.

“It can be demonstrated. Goodness is largely a question of having
aptitude for the latest conventions.”

“Demonstrate,” she challenged, and then added: “Personally, I feel it,
but have not the proof to hand.”

I took up the challenge easily.

“For instance, in ancient Sparta, thieving was a virtue and cowardice
a crime. Nowadays, a coward may get along very well, but a thief would
probably come to grief very soon. So it is with many other things.”

“You think that a criminal may make a charming member of society, a
good husband and father?”

I winced. The conversation was extracting opinions from me which were
just as well concealed, but I answered frankly:

“I am sure of it.”

“So am I.”

I continued whimsically:

“Don’t you think society would be much happier if, instead of these
horrible punishments and immurings, people who had been convicted of a
crime should be compelled to wear some outward sign that they were not
to be trusted in that particular direction? It should be treated as a
disease, not as a disgrace.”

“A little difficult to enforce, eh?”

“Not at all. We should all be up in arms if Brown came to lunch
without the governmental mark that he was not to be trusted with forks
and spoons, and without the least acrimony we should call in a
policeman who would correct the matter.”

“It might be carried still further, and people might be obliged to
wear the evidence of their particular moral failing.”

“Everybody would lie, and which do you think would be the most popular
hypocrisy?”

“In England, drink; because in the eyes of the average citizen of this
country it would carry with it the least shame.”

“Well said; but to my mind there is no vice which is not preferable,
and yet people will shake a drunkard by the hand when they would
shrink from a criminal of the emotions.”

We both agreed that this was ridiculous. I had not been in the house
an hour before I realised that she was a very charming woman, and that
she was sincerely in love with Ughtred Gascoyne.

She harped a good deal on friendship, as if to exaggerate her sense of
its value, and send the hearer away with the notion that a pure
friendship between man and woman was her ideal.

I have, however, always had a keen instinct for the subtleties of
female deception, and I was fully alive to the trend of her
dissertations on friendship. They were the weapons she kept constantly
in use for the defence of her character. She need not have been so
careful, for the attacks and insinuations on her reputation were far
fewer than she imagined. She was one of the chartered exceptions to
the general demands of propriety. These exceptions exist to a certain
degree, even in the most straight-laced society. She made some witty
remark about the suburbs, that never-failing topic for the jests of
those who consider themselves the elect of the social citadel of
Mayfair.

“I am a suburban,” I answered. “I was brought up in Clapham.”

“You hardly suggest the suburbs,” she answered, unabashed.

“Oh, believe me, there are people of distinction in the suburbs.”

“Of course; only, one must have one’s little joke about them.
Personally, I always tell my friends that they must not be too sure
that they are free from the parochial because they dwell within hail
of Piccadilly Circus.”

“Still, I think that, after all, the Londoner has a quickness and
intelligence denied to the provincial, don’t you?”

“Yes, to the provincial, but not necessarily to the inhabitants of
greater London. The guttersnipe of Manchester is a very stupid
creature after your Cockney urchin.”

We went upstairs and talked until her regular coterie dropped in.

Sir Anthony Cross, whom I had met at Lady Pebworth’s, was one of the
first to arrive. He did not like me, but, to my surprise, drew me into
a corner.

“Do you remember, Rank, that evening the Pebworths and ourselves went
to the Gaiety?”

“Perfectly.”

“You bowed to an awfully pretty woman in the stalls. She was with a
good-looking bounder.”

I knew perfectly well whom he meant, of course; but, as he paused for
me to refresh my memory, I looked puzzled.

“You must remember—an extraordinarily pretty woman.”

I still looked blank.

“Surely you must remember. A fair woman with fluffy hair and enormous
blue eyes, but not a bit dolly, like most fair women. Rather a large
mouth.”

“Oh yes; I think I remember.”

“Well, I fancy she’s married to that man.”

“If it’s the girl I think you mean, she is married to him. Her name is
Sibella Holland.” It was not very well-bred to call Lionel Holland a
bounder without first finding out if he was a friend of mine.

“What a ripping name! They’ve got a flat below mine. I should very
much like to know them.”

“Do you want me to introduce you?”

Considering that Sir Anthony had gone out of his way on more than one
occasion to be rude to me, I could not help thinking that there was a
certain insolence in his obvious readiness to make use of me. If he
intended doing so, however, I should certainly return the compliment.

“I am obliged to hurry away now, but that’s my address. I am usually
at home between six and seven.”

I gave him a card and said good-bye.

I had promised to spend the evening with the Gascoynes. I was making
immense strides with their niece, and I fancy that both Mr. and Mrs.
Gascoyne were a little surprised at our having so much in common.



Chapter XIV

If I was to have access to Sibella at all, it was necessary to make
friends with her husband, and the only way to make friends with him
was to be useful to him. I knew quite well that my continued
success—and success in his eyes was a question of moving in a higher
grade of society—had annoyed him beyond measure. He believed that
money ought to be able to buy anything. Money is a thing the power of
which the vulgar are always overrating and the cultured are always
underrating. He and Sibella had a large income, with the prospect of a
very much larger one, therefore the doors of good society should fly
open. They knew people who had been her friends before marriage, and
who moved in what a celebrated English lady novelist would have called
“genteel circles,” but her husband, having neither the atmosphere of
good breeding nor the tact which might have taken its place, was
ambitious of forcing the most select assemblies.

If I could be of use to him in this way I was sure that he would be
content to waive his dislike for the present, especially as he
imagined himself to be in sole possession of the prize we had
contended for.

It was, of course, just possible that Sibella herself might now object
to my coming to the house. She might have fallen passionately in love
with her husband, as wives often do after marriage. Lady Pebworth was
still ready to do anything for me, and if Sibella was still ready to
receive me, I must persuade her ladyship to call.

I met Lionel on his way home from the City one evening, and somewhat
to his surprise stopped to speak to him. He was a little cool at
first, but I was careful to start a conversation about himself, and he
warmed to the subject at once.

He talked of being sick of the City. His father was very ill, and he
expressed his intention of selling out and giving up the business
should anything happen to the old gentleman.

“I shall go and live in the country, and get as much hunting and
shooting as I can manage.”

“Still, a man ought to do something,” I suggested.

“Oh, cut that; don’t preach.”

“I wasn’t thinking of it from a moral point of view. You’re a rich
man. You ought to furnish the powers that be with sufficient excuse
for giving you something later on.”

“What do you mean?”

“A man with twenty thousand a year may aspire to anything.”

“What am I to do?”

“Go in for politics. The losing side, of course. They’ll be having
their spell of office in a few years.”

“I don’t know anything about politics.”

“No, but you’ve got intelligence; you’ll soon learn.”

He looked flattered. Inwardly I smiled at the idea of his being in the
House of Commons.

“How does one begin?”

It was strange that Lionel, who was heir to a couple of newspapers,
should know so little.

“Oh, you get to know all the right people. Let them know that you are
ready to drop a certain amount of money. Lady Pebworth was saying only
the other day that their people want money. She’s rather a power in
the political world, you know.”

He looked vacant, and had the frankness to ask:

“Who’s Lady Pebworth?”

“Well, her husband was in the last Cabinet. Your wife ought to know
her. Lady Pebworth admired her immensely the only time she saw her.”

“Have they met?”

“No, but do you remember one evening when you and Sibella were in the
stalls at the Gaiety, and I was in a box with some people?”

“Yes.”

“That was Lady Pebworth. She has been very civil to me. I don’t
suppose I should have had such a good time if it had not been for
her.”

This admission of my own indebtedness to someone else for the entrée
to certain houses that he had envied me made him quite genial, and
broke down the barrier between us, while a little more flattery
judiciously laid on accomplished what I desired.

“You haven’t been to see us yet,” he said, quite graciously.

“I haven’t been asked,” I laughed.

“I’ll get Sibella to write and ask you to one of our Sunday lunches.”

We parted quite amicably, and I think I left him under the impression
that I was most anxious to be friendly with him.

Sir Anthony Cross delayed coming to see me, as I thought he would, but
evidently he could think of no other way of making Sibella’s
acquaintance, and one evening when I was drinking tea—a habit to which
I am addicted—he was shown in.

“No thanks, I never drink tea. I don’t know what people see in it.”

There was a perceptible patronage in his manner. He assumed the usual
attitude of an Englishman of birth when brought into familiar
intercourse with a man of whose caste he is not sure. There was no
superficial fault to be found with his manner, but it was obvious to a
keen perception that he presumed a gulf.

“Not tea as they make it in this country,” I answered languidly. “Tea
drinking is an art. It is one of the most extraordinary facts of the
latter part of the nineteenth century how readily the country
exchanged China for Indian tea, and yet it is like preferring cider to
champagne.” I pushed the cigars towards him. “Most men cannot
appreciate tea because their palates are ruined by alcohol.”

The cigar put him in a good temper; I knew that it was something
exceptional.

He was not interested in the subject of tea, but at the same time,
being a gentleman, he hardly liked to make it too patent that he had
come about an introduction to a woman, and that further than obtaining
that introduction he was not prepared to consider our acquaintance.

“You’ve got a jolly little place here,” he said, looking round. I knew
that in his heart he considered it somewhat overdone.

“I am a Jew, and as an Oriental I defy the canons of Western good
taste in order to get the amount of colour necessary to my appetite.”

He did not quite follow, and I did not intend that he should. It was
of no account. There were limits even to my adaptability, and I am
afraid I never could have adapted myself to the idiosyncrasies of Sir
Anthony Cross. I don’t think he had a single delicate sentiment in
him.

After a time, and when I considered he had listened to me long enough
to be sufficiently subdued, I said: “Oh, by the way, I met Holland,
Mrs. Holland’s husband, you know, a few days ago.”

“Yes?” He made a valiant effort to conceal his interest.

“They are only just married, and of course very much in love.”

“What is he?”

“Well, as far as I know, he is something in his father’s business. His
father is enormously wealthy—owns a couple of newspapers. I don’t
think he’ll hold out much longer though, and then the young people
will come into everything.”

Riches did not mean much to Sir Anthony Cross. He had eighty thousand
a year, so report said.

He was evidently too obsessed with the idea of Sibella to be turned
aside by a husband.

“Of course,” I continued, “her brother is my greatest friend; we were
at school together. She and I used to be sweethearts when we were
children, but when Lionel Holland came on the scene he cut me out.”

“She looks a charming woman, and I should very much like to know her.”

“I can introduce you to Holland if you like. I’ll ask them both to
dine and meet you.”

Sir Anthony hardly disguised his joy.

“I shall be delighted,” he said.

“Then I’ll let you know when I’ve fixed things up.”

I gave him the opportunity of departing, but he stayed on, talking
incessantly of Sibella. He was so infatuated as to be unable to
appreciate how obvious he was making it that he was seeking an
introduction to a married woman because he was in love with her.

I knew that Sir Anthony was a friend of Ughtred Gascoyne’s, and it
might so happen that he would be useful to me in that direction.

“Have you known Mrs. Goodsall long?” he asked.

“A few weeks.”

“Don’t know Gascoyne, do you?”

“Who is he?”

“Ughtred Gascoyne; I thought everybody knew him. He’s a great pal of
hers. People do say things, but I don’t believe it myself. I mention
him because I’ve heard a rumour that her husband is dead, and that she
and Gascoyne are going to be married.”

“Indeed?”

“Of course they’ve always been thick, but it isn’t often the man does
the right thing.”

I laughed.

“No, there’s all the difference in being able to go and see a woman
when you want to and being obliged to see her when you don’t want to.
Such a prospect immediately subjects her to a new test. I know a great
many women who are delightful companions, but I should not care to
live with them.”

He went away at last, after making me promise again that I would
arrange the dinner and let him know.

I was determined, if possible, to persuade Lady Pebworth to be of the
party, and called on her a day or two after. She had just returned to
town, and received me rather coldly. She had been away for three
months, and she protested that I had written to her but twice during
her absence. I pointed out that she was blaming me for a too zealous
care of her reputation, and that it was one thing for her to write to
me when the chance of her letters being seen by anyone else was
practically non-existent, and quite another thing for me to write to
her, and that I had only done so when I was certain that Lord Pebworth
was out of the way. It took me some time to soothe her, inasmuch as
she informed me that she thought our friendship had better cease, and
I really believe she was in the mood to take a great resolution. This
roused me to an effort. It was not convenient to quarrel with her at
the moment. I regret to say that in the course of our interview her
ladyship so far forgot what was due to good taste as to throw my
obscurity in my face, and to make a scarcely veiled insinuation that
had it not been for her I should not have been acquainted with anyone
of consequence. At this I dignifiedly rose, and, telling her that I
had no wish to intrude where I was considered an adventurer, moved
towards the door. Then she begged my pardon, said she could not
understand how she came to be so rude, and professed her undying
readiness to do anything for me. A weaker diplomatist might have
seized the opportunity to mention the dinner-party, but I cautiously
paid court to her for some days before I asked her if she would come
and meet Sibella and her husband. I explained that Lionel was quite
ready to be of financial use to her political organisation, putting it
in such a way that it was impossible for her to take offence. Finally,
she said she would be very glad, so I made up my dinner-party, which
was quite a little social triumph.

I fancy Sir Anthony Cross was surprised when he heard whom he was
asked to meet.

I entertained them at the best restaurant in town. Sibella’s manners
were perfect—they always were when she chose—and Lady Pebworth took an
immediate liking to her, I of course being very careful not to show
the least partiality for her.

The Hollands thus found themselves taken up by a woman who could
probably launch them better than they could, in their wildest dreams,
have expected. To do her justice, I do not think Sibella would have
run after anybody for the purpose of getting into better society. She
had enough of the Hallward pride and egotism to save her from
vulgarity. At the same time she was quite prepared to swim with the
tide and hold her own.

Sir Anthony managed to keep his admiration within bounds, and the
evening was a great success. We finished up by spending an hour at a
famous theatre of varieties. Lionel Holland from this time attached
himself to me much more than I cared about. He was amazingly proud of
Sir Anthony’s friendship, and I fancy that exclusive gentleman had to
pay somewhat dearly for the privilege of being near Sibella so much.
He became quite the friend of the house, however.

Sibella’s dazzling beauty was not long in making its way. She was
noticed at a brilliant social function by exalted folk, and as a
consequence was presented by Lady Pebworth. Lionel was selected as a
forlorn hope for the next General Election, and Mr. Holland was so
pleased that he appreciably increased their allowance.

It may be asked what good this was all doing me. As a matter of fact,
it is an instance of how impossible it is to generalise about
character. I was perfectly sure of my power over Sibella, and enjoyed
seeing her admired and sweeping everything before her.

They could not get away from the fact—and I don’t think Sibella had
any wish to—that it was I who had launched them. Of course, people
tried to shatter Sibella’s reputation by way of putting a speedy stop
to her upward climb, but nothing could be said which was in any way
susceptible of proof.

I had not since her marriage treated her with anything except the most
ordinary friendliness. I was certainly not going to risk a snub. I was
convinced of one thing, that had I made a more strenuous effort to win
her from Lionel Holland I might have done so. Perhaps some intuitive
feeling warned me to suffer, and not to risk my own ultimate profit.

Whilst engaged in trifles I was not neglecting the main business of my
life. I had not been able to avoid an introduction to Ughtred
Gascoyne, who somewhat inopportunely took a fancy to me. It was rather
awkward, as it would have been far more convenient to have remained
unknown.

By degrees it leaked out that Catherine Goodsall’s husband was dead,
and that she and Ughtred Gascoyne were going to be married. She told
me the news herself, with tears in her eyes. I am sure I should have
been glad if the words of congratulation I spoke could have been
sincere, and I really hoped that things could at least be so arranged
that they might have some time of married happiness before Ughtred
Gascoyne was removed. But this was not my business; and, further, it
might result in another human obstacle being placed in my path.

Their wedding was fixed for a day in Christmas week. It was now
October. I had therefore not much time to lose. Of course, neither of
them was young, and it was improbable that they would have any
children, but it was possible. I had so managed to make everything in
my mind subservient to my main object that the prospect of Catherine
Goodsall’s disappointment only raised a momentary pang.

I racked my brains by day and night, trying to devise some new and
entirely original way of starting Ughtred Gascoyne on his way to a
happier world.

Being known as a friend of his, it would not do to use poison. Pistols
and daggers, although they have their uses, both in melodrama and out
of it, did not commend themselves. They suggested danger, blood, and
noise. I had early grasped the cardinal principles of my undertaking;
firstly, that I must be absolutely relentless; and, secondly, that the
word horror must be eliminated from my vocabulary.

As I lay awake one night in my room in St. James’s thinking the matter
over, I heard the cry of fire, the galloping of horses, and the jingle
of the engine as it swayed along Piccadilly. I have always been fond
of fires: even as a small boy they possessed a weird fascination for
me.

I lay debating whether I should not get up and see the fun. It was
evidently not far off, for I could hear the hiss of the water as it
shot through the air, and the shouts of men. Suddenly an idea came
into my head. Fire was apparently used as a rule in the clumsiest way
by murderers. How often may it not have been used successfully and
with complete secrecy?

It was important to keep in mind that successful crimes do not as a
rule come to light.

Arson to the average mind always conveys a sensation of horror that is
perhaps wanting in all other crimes. Suffocation or burning were
neither of them pleasant methods, but I was not to be deterred by a
sentiment.

The idea, once in my brain, became fixed. I found it impossible to
dislodge it. I should have liked to go to the British Museum and read
up all the details I could obtain of crime by arson, but this would
have been a risky proceeding, and might in the never-to-be-forgotten
contingency of my falling under suspicion be exceedingly damning.

I should have to trust to my own invention. Ughtred Gascoyne had asked
me to call on him, and early one Sunday morning I did so. He occupied
an upper part in Albemarle Street. There was a side door and a flight
of stairs leading to his rooms. I immediately grasped the importance
of the fact that there was no porter or lift. He had a manservant who
slept on the floor above his own, and a woman who came in in the
daytime. The establishment was thus conveniently miniature. On the
first floor he had a sitting-room that led into his bedroom, with a
bathroom beyond. Above this was his dining-room, which was seldom
used; also a kitchen and a very small bedroom for his servant. The
place was old, curiously so for such a smart quarter of the town, and,
I imagined, highly combustible.

The rooms were too solidly furnished for my purpose, but they had
muslin curtains and a fair number of knick-knacks. I quite realised
that it was an off chance, but at the same time I believed it could be
carried out with little or no personal risk. What I particularly
wished to do was to enter his rooms with him at night without anybody
being aware of it, and to leave them unnoticed.

The Sunday morning I called on him he was, I fancy, a little surprised
to see me, but evidently quite pleased.

“I am very fond of young people, and I like to have them about me.
Mrs. Goodsall and I agree on that. I cannot understand old people who
are content to vegetate with their faded contemporaries.”

“It isn’t everybody who gets on with young people.”

“It is merely a question of mood. You must feel young, and you will
get on with them well enough.”

“To feel young. Therein lies the difficulty for most people.”

“Yes, most people eat and drink and sedenterate themselves—if I may
coin a verb—into premature old age.”

Whilst he talked I was wondering how long it would take to suffocate a
human being, and what density of smoke was necessary, and whether he
was a heavy sleeper, a fact he was good enough to enlighten me on.

“Youth is merely a question of spirits, and spirits are largely if not
entirely a question of sleep. No, I have never missed a night’s sleep
in my life that I can remember, not even”—he lowered his voice—“when
my mother died.”

“You are lucky. I wish I could say as much.”

“Directly my head touches the pillow I am asleep, and I don’t wake
till I am called.”

This was indeed good news, that is, if it could be relied upon. It is
amazing how people will lie about their own habits. They are a matter
of personal delusion to a great extent, and people talking about
themselves will, in good faith, deny idiosyncrasies of which their
intimates are fully aware.

For aught I could be sure of, Ughtred Gascoyne was a martyr to
insomnia, although he certainly did not suggest it.

His bedroom was a light, airy room with very little furniture, and a
severe, narrow bed such as is affected by the average English
gentleman, and is to me an abomination.

At any rate, this was the room it was my business to set on fire with
such completeness as might ensure the passing of Ughtred Gascoyne.

It is the usual habit for those with a weakness for arson to empty
paraffin oil over a quantity of furniture, and then set a light to it,
a method of procedure that nearly always leads to detection. I
remembered when thinking over my plans that Ughtred Gascoyne’s rooms
were lighted by lamps and not by electric light. Would this help me in
any way? It might. I already foresaw that my nerve and courage would
be called into play in this enterprise far more than had hitherto been
the case.

October passed and some part of November, and nothing had been done,
except that I had grown more and more friendly with Ughtred Gascoyne.
He was very musical, and liked to hear me sing and play.

Sometimes I made a point of meeting him late at night on his way home
from the club, and went in and smoked a cigar with him. I could not
help reflecting how very much those whom it was my unfortunate duty to
remove seemed to like me. Perhaps it was a premonition that I was
about to do them a good turn or what might prove to be so.

His servant was usually in bed when I returned to his rooms with him
at night.

Both Catherine Goodsall and he were always talking of the time they
would have me to stay with them at the little place they were taking
in the country.

“Quite small,” said Ughtred Gascoyne, “but altogether delightful,
isn’t it, Catherine?”

“You know, dear, I’m in love with it. I am looking forward to having a
little vault in that dear old church with a stained glass window, to
the memory of Ughtred and Catherine Gascoyne of this parish.”

“I can’t say that that is a very cheerful way of looking forward.”

“Well, it’s only when that happens that a woman can be said to have
her husband to herself.”

We laughed. It was really quite delightful to see how happy they meant
to be, and after all if “man never is but always to be blest,” and the
pleasure of all things is a question of the imagination and lies
almost entirely in anticipation, they had had as much pleasure out of
it as could be expected.

I knew the time Ughtred Gascoyne usually went home, and my meetings
with him, looked upon by him as accidental, were by no means so.

November went by, and it was the first week in December, and,
strangely enough in this perverse climate of ours, the weather was
bitterly cold. It was the sort of weather for my purpose, for Ughtred
Gascoyne was a great stickler for fresh air, and it was only in such
weather as this that he was likely to shut his windows. He was turning
into Bond Street one night when I passed him. I laughed as we met.

“You won’t be allowed to stay out as late as this soon.”

“No, penal servitude is upon me. Coming in?”

We went up to his room, where there was a bright fire burning.

“Now, this is comfortable. By the way, I met a cousin of mine to-day.
He says you are in his office.”

“I told you I was in a stockbroker’s office.”

“Yes, but you never told me he was my cousin, and that you are also a
cousin.”

“I always leave the Gascoynes to find me out themselves. You see, my
mother was a Gascoyne, and she was left to keep lodgings in Clapham.”

He looked at me kindly.

“You don’t feel bitter?”

“Oh dear no, only it isn’t a great encouragement to push myself
forward, is it?”

“He tells me that there is another cousin of mine staying with him and
his wife. He describes her as beautiful. What do you think?”

“I agree. I knew her brother.”

“Poor Harry Gascoyne. Killed by a fall from his horse, wasn’t he?”

“Horse kicked him.”

“Strange, must have been a brute.”

I talked to him as he undressed. He was inquisitive about the South
Kensington household.

“Hardly know Gascoyne Gascoyne myself. Always heard he married badly.”

“He married very well, only her father happened to be a linen-draper.”

“Good heavens, that’s nothing in our days. Lord Southwick’s
father-in-law was a grocer, and a very distinguished old gentleman,
too. A damned sight better bred than ever the Southwicks were. They
all look like stable-boys. Sort of family in which you’d think the
women had been going wrong with the grooms for generations. Southwick
married groceries and manners at the same time.”

“Mrs. Gascoyne is a very charming woman.”

“My dear fellow, I can quite believe it. A man like Gascoyne Gascoyne
does not retain his polish undimmed if he has been living for years
with a woman who isn’t a lady at heart.”

“I don’t think Miss Gascoyne would be devoted to anyone who was
capable of offending the canons of good taste.”

“They are great friends?”

“I should think so.”

“Well, when I am married we must have a nice family party. Don’t mind
my getting into bed. You can let yourself out, can’t you?”

“Easily.”

I stood and talked to him while I put on my coat, and then I said
good-night.

“Oh, do you mind shutting my bedroom door, the woman makes such a
beastly row doing it if it’s left till the morning.”

“Good-night.”

“Good-night. Mind you come to my wedding.”

I shut the bedroom door. I was in the outer room alone. I went to the
door, and going outside shut it. Then I ran downstairs, opened the
front door and banged it, leaving myself inside. I sat down on the
stairs and waited. After a while I stole upstairs again. The darkened
room with the firelight playing over it looked very comfortable. I
gently took the glass off the reading-lamp, and, unscrewing the
burner, poured the contents over the foot of the curtains near which
was the only wicker chair in the room.

I had to close the old-fashioned shutters so as to screen the room
from any policeman on his beat as long as possible. One of my original
ideas had been to put a large piece of coal on the fire and lower the
register, leaving the room to fill with smoke.

The lowering of the register, however, would make noise. Things were
better as they were. While I was completing all these arrangements I
was on the alert for the least sound from the other room. Again and
again I paused, ready to make for the door and be out of the house
before he could reach me. I had placed a chair in such a position in
front of his door that he would be bound to trip over it if he came
out in a hurry.

Lastly came the most difficult part of my task. I had to remove the
chair and open his bedroom door slightly. I listened long and
carefully till a snore assured me that it was safe. I leant across the
chair and opened the door a little way. The heavy breathing in the bed
stopped. For one moment I felt terror; the next moment he had snored
again. I removed the chair.

The striking of a match might have betrayed me. I lit a piece of paper
at the fire and held it to the soaked curtains. Then I was out of the
room like a shot and downstairs. As I glanced back the room was
already full of flame.

When I emerged into the streets I looked carefully up and down. There
was not a policeman to be seen. I reached my rooms and went to bed. I
wish I could boast of such a nerve as would have allowed me to sleep
through the night.

The next morning I started for the City at the usual time. I scanned
the morning paper, but there was nothing about a fire in Albemarle
Street. At lunch-time the first thing that met my gaze as I left the
office was a placard issued by one of the earlier and cheaper evening
papers:—‘Gentleman suffocated in Albemarle Street.’

With an extraordinary calm I read that about three a.m. a fire
occurred at the chambers of the Hon. Ughtred Gascoyne, resulting in
the death of that gentleman, who was well known in social and sporting
circles. His servant, who slept on the floor above, was awakened by
the smell of smoke, and getting out of bed and hurrying to the top of
the stairs to arouse his master was driven back by the flames and
smoke. He was subsequently rescued by a fire escape from the top
storey.

On the fire being extinguished the unfortunate gentleman was
discovered in his bed. He must have been suffocated in his sleep.

I put down the paper with satisfaction and ate a good lunch. I had at
any rate not inflicted any great physical suffering.

Mr. Gascoyne came back from his lunch looking very white.

“It’s a most awful thing, Israel. There seems to be a curse on our
family.”

“Why, sir, what is the matter now?”

“You know my cousin Ughtred?”

“Yes.”

“The poor fellow has been suffocated in his bed.”

I appeared horrified. “You don’t mean to say at his rooms in Albemarle
Street?”

“Yes.”

I looked terribly concerned.

“He was to have been married quite soon.”

“So I understood. Mrs. Goodsall, the actress, wasn’t it?”

“Yes.”

“Curiously enough, I met him yesterday at the club of a friend of
mine. I hadn’t seen him for years.”

I called a hansom directly I left the office and drove to Albemarle
Street. A small group was watching the house from the other side of
the road. The windows were boarded up and the stonework round them
blackened with smoke. I knocked at the door, and it was opened by
Ughtred Gascoyne’s servant. He had reason to remember me with
gratitude, for I knew that servants are the adventurer’s staunchest
allies or greatest enemies.

“Will you step inside, sir? Lord Gascoyne has been here most of the
day. He’s just gone.”

I did not wish to meet his lordship.

“When do you expect him to return?”

“Not till to-morrow, sir.”

I went in. There was a gruesome smell of charred wood and stuffs. I
followed Mason upstairs.

“This it where it must have begun, sir.” He pointed to where the
wicker work chair had stood.

“What I can’t understand, sir, is how the shutters came to be closed.
I never knew Mr. Gascoyne to shut them, and he gave me particular
instructions to the contrary. There was no need for them, you see.”

I looked towards the bedroom.

“They took him away to the mortuary, sir, to await the inquest. No man
could have been a better master.”

“He was a splendid chap, Mason. You know how I looked up to him.” I
spoke in my most ingenuous tones.

“And very fond he was of you, sir. He was always at home to you.”

I pressed half a sovereign into his hand.

“Did he come home alone, Mason?”

“No, sir—at least, I fancy I heard voices. Oh yes, and I heard the
door bang. I don’t know who it was, sir, I’m sure.”

The front room was quite burnt out, and there could be absolutely no
trace of the oil with which I had started the conflagration.

I had apparently succeeded in a very risky undertaking.

I left a card at Mrs. Goodsall’s with my deepest sympathy. The servant
informed me she was quite prostrated, and I was made somewhat
uncomfortable by hearing sounds of sobbing from the second storey of
the tiny house.

At the Gascoynes’, where I was to dine, I found the household in the
deepest gloom. The tragedy seemed to have brought back something of
the bitterness of their own grief. It was too similar in its horror to
the death of the two young Gascoynes to be much discussed. We avoided
gloomy topics with an almost hysterical earnestness, but it is
extraordinary how matters of that kind will obtrude themselves when
they are desired not to do so. Left alone with Mr. Gascoyne, however,
the constraint passed and we talked freely.

“Just one of those things that are quite inexplicable. The fire
brigade authorities do not agree with the theory that a live coal must
have dropped out of the grate. They think the fire originated at the
other end of the room, and that it must have been a cigarette or
something of the kind.”

“It doesn’t matter much what it was, does it?”

“Of course not; only one cannot help travelling round a case like that
and looking at it from every point of view. I called there this
afternoon.”

“And I was there this evening.”

“Did you see Lord Gascoyne?”

“No.”

“He was there when I called, and seemed terribly upset. He kept on
saying, ‘Poor Uncle Ughtred!’ and ‘He was the life and soul of
everything.’”

I could not see that these remarks of Lord Gascoyne’s were very
illuminating or helpful, but it is curious how little people trouble
to be sensible when they are talking of the dead.

Miss Gascoyne pressed my hand as I said good-night.

“What a friend you are! You are always cheering us. You knew him, too,
which makes it all the nicer of you to be so cheerful.”

“Good-night,” I said, and then threw into my glance a confession of
admiration for which I had been months preparing the way. I was sure
that had I ventured on such a thing a year before she would have felt
anger, born of injured pride, but now her eyes fell, and I knew that I
was on the road to success. She had taken me at my own valuation, as I
had intended she should.



Chapter XV

I was glad to discover that Ughtred Gascoyne had left all his little
fortune, excepting such as did not return to the Gascoyne coffers, to
Catherine Goodsall, and that she would be quite well off. She looked
very woebegone when I saw her again, but she was not a pessimist, and
soon pulled herself together; not that I believe she ever forgot him.
She gave me a tie-pin that had belonged to him, because he had been
very fond of me, and had often talked of me to her.

A Sunday or two afterwards I lunched with Sibella and her husband. The
old hunger for her was beginning to grow on me, and impel me towards
her.

They were for a wonder alone, and Lionel looked discontented. He had
evidently reached the frame of mind peculiar to vulgar folk, who think
that unless they are living at high pressure and constantly
entertaining or being entertained by those they consider great they
are dropping out of it. Great folk can afford their holidays, but such
social climbers as Lionel Holland can have no respite from the
treadmill of entertainment.

I think he was verily too stupid to see that it was his wife’s beauty
and charm, lacking in depth though they were, to which they owed their
improved position.

Sir Anthony Cross—who I knew was with them constantly—must have played
a very clever game, a much cleverer game than I had imagined him
capable of. To do Lionel justice, he was not the sort of man to play
the complaisant husband for the sake of any position, and he had
evidently not grasped that Sir Anthony’s presence at their house was
solely and entirely due to admiration of his wife.

I was certain that so far Sir Anthony had not even been permitted to
declare himself. Sibella was vain enough of his attention to keep him
dangling after her, but she had no notion of making herself cheap to
the men of a society the women of which she was anxious to propitiate.

I suppose Lionel thought that an old lover like myself, who had been
discarded for years, was no possible danger. Possibly—for the minx was
clever—he had absolute confidence in Sibella.

At any rate, after lunch he left us together. It was the first time we
had been alone since her marriage.

It was a little awkward, but I exerted myself to free the situation
from constraint.

“Things have changed,” I said, lighting another cigarette with a
languid feeling of enjoyment at being alone with her, and conscious
that the ménage I had contemplated had begun.

“You are wonderful, Israel. It is quite extraordinary how people talk
about you, and quote what you say, and yet——” She paused, and I
laughed.

“And yet I began life in a third-rate Clapham lodging-house, and am
still only a clerk in a stockbroker’s office.”

“As far as that goes, I can’t quite see why people make such a fuss of
us.”

“Can’t you? Then look in the glass.”

Sibella rippled with laughter. She loved flattery, and expected it.

“My dear child,” I said lazily, “everything finds its level. We were
bound to rise. You and I, Sibella, are very wonderful people.”

“And Lionel?”

“Lionel is not in the least wonderful. He is good-looking, but by
himself he would never have wheeled the shortest flight above the
ordinary.”

“I won’t have you talking against my husband.”

“I am not talking against him. I have rather an affection for Lionel.
He is your husband.”

“It is sometimes borne in upon me, Israel, and I cannot say why, that
you are extraordinarily wicked.”

“What makes you think that?”

“There is something mysterious about you. There always was even as a
boy, and it has grown with you.”

I did not like to hear this. Above all people, a secret murderer
cannot afford to suggest the mysterious.

“Do you remember what a pretty little boy you were?” she asked.

“Perfectly.”

“Do you know, I’ve got a lock of your hair that I cut off at a
children’s party. It’s such a dear, silky little curl. Quite black.”

“Let me see it.”

She rose and left the room. Returning, she unwrapped the covering of
tissue paper and showed me the curl, as soft and sweet as the day it
was cut.

“My hair is coarser than that now,” I laughed.

“It’s very nice hair, Israel.”

And then I took her in my arms and kissed her, which may seem rather
premature, but there had been that in the conversation which had led
up to the situation. Of course, Sibella would not have been a woman
had she not declared that she would never forget that she was now
Lionel’s wife, and that on a former occasion she must have been mad.
She repeated that she always knew I was wicked, and that I had gained
an ascendancy over her. She then proceeded to tell me that I was in
love with Lady Pebworth, with whom she had lately had a coolness. That
lady evidently thought that she had purchased by her introductions a
perpetual right to the subservience of Sibella and her husband. She
was now experiencing the utter callousness of Sibella’s disposition
towards her own sex, a callousness she was exceedingly clever at
masking till she had obtained what she wanted.

It was difficult to say where the weak point in Sibella’s armour came
in. She was, of course, vain, but as a rule her vanity was not allowed
to interfere with her interests. She was dominated to a great extent
by looks. It was this passion for beautiful people that had made it a
perfectly safe proceeding to introduce Sir Anthony Cross to her. I was
sure that no man so destitute of pretensions to physical charm could
ever win her suffrages. In fact, I was pleased to know that he was
always to be seen near her, for his case was hopeless.

“Perhaps it is a very good thing we did not marry, Sibella. A strict
barrier should always be preserved between the official and the
sentimental roles.”

“My dear Israel, Lionel is much more sentimental than you are.”

“Women are amazingly quick. Perhaps sentiment is the wrong word; I
should have said romantic.”

“What is the difference?”

“There is all the difference. The sentimentalist has no sense of
humour. The romanticist generally has too much. A romanticist may
possess the salt of cynicism; a sentimentalist seldom.”

Sibella had something of an intellect, and I think, perhaps, that was
also a weak point, for inasmuch as it was a poorly developed sort of
affair it was easily dazzled, and she would at the merest flicker from
an opposing mind credit it with much that it did not possess.

I had led the conversation away from Lady Pebworth, but she brought it
back again, and flattered me by insisting on learning from my own lips
that I had no affection for the lady.

Fortunately she only knew of Miss Gascoyne’s existence in a vague sort
of way.

“What would you do, Sibella, if I married?”

“Forbid it.”

“You think that would be effective?”

“If it were not I should never speak to you again.”

“Ah, unfortunately it is forbidden to a discretion like yours to take
such extreme measures.”

“Why?”

“Lionel would want to know why we had quarrelled.”

How she would act when it came to telling her that I was engaged to
Miss Gascoyne—which I hoped would shortly be the case—I could not say.
Miss Gascoyne’s extreme beauty and distinction would not help the
matter.

I had my hands quite full, for I was working very hard at the office,
and making myself as indispensable as possible to Mr. Gascoyne. The
rest of the staff had ceased being jealous when they saw that I was
determined to get what I wanted. Such remarks as “one of those damned
Jews again,” unintentionally overheard by me, I ignored with the
sublime cynicism of my race. Nothing was to be gained by being aware
of them, less was to be gained by cherishing resentment. Jews are not
good at revenge; it is not business. Shylock’s case was exceptional,
and, given time, his common sense would have reasserted itself.

I was even treated as the natural heir to the business, for I had
wisely thrown out veiled hints of a partnership to the managing clerk.

I was about this time somewhat scared by a suitor appearing for Miss
Gascoyne’s hand, and such a suitor as must have made any mere business
man tremble for his own chance.

I knew that Miss Gascoyne was constantly receiving the very best
invitations, which she seldom accepted. I also knew that she and her
uncle and aunt had dined with the Gascoynes, and I had heard
mentioned, not, however, as a matter of any great consequence, that
they had met there a Mr. Hibbert-Wyllie. I was therefore a little
astonished on calling one Sunday afternoon to find Mr. Hibbert-Wyllie,
a young man undeniably handsome and well-bred, in the drawing-room. I
could not stay long, but even in the short time I was there it was
obvious that the object of his visit was Miss Gascoyne. He was
evidently rich, for outside the door was an exceedingly luxurious
motor. I looked him up in the landed gentry, and found that he was one
of the untitled nobility. He had a huge estate, and was related to
half the peerage. His sisters were a duchess and two countesses, and
his younger brother was already a distinguished member of Parliament.
He was Lord-Lieutenant of his county, and altogether a notable person.
It seemed as if, granting any inclination on Miss Gascoyne’s part, my
fate was sealed.

The next time I called Mrs. Gascoyne said to me when we were alone:

“I am afraid my niece will not be with us much longer.”

“Indeed?”

I think she must have had some notion that I had dreamed of Miss
Gascoyne as my wife, for there was an accent of kindliness in her
voice.

“You have met Mr. Hibbert-Wyllie?”

“Oh, yes.” I almost gasped. Surely she was not going to tell me that
Miss Gascoyne was engaged to him already.

“It will be a splendid match. She is quite the woman to take her place
at the head of county society.”

“They are engaged?”

“Oh dear no, but anyone can see that there is a mutual attraction, and
it is altogether so exactly suitable that we hope it will take place.”

I had never before considered Mrs. Gascoyne a fool.

Mr. Gascoyne came in soon after, and she began again. I think she
believed it the kindest thing to do.

“I have just been talking to Israel about Edith and Mr.
Hibbert-Wyllie.”

Mr. Gascoyne looked astonished, and gave me a side-long glance.

“Indeed? Don’t you think, my dear, we are a little premature?”

“There is no harm in discussing it.”

In a few minutes Mr. Hibbert-Wyllie and Miss Gascoyne came in.

I had never met Mr. Hibbert-Wyllie anywhere except at the Gascoynes’.
He had all the unfailing and general courtesy of the absolutely
exclusive. He was not a man who, as far as I could gather, went out
much, but he entertained Royalty a good deal, having some of the
finest shooting in England.

Of his manner to me I had certainly no reason to complain, but I think
he was a little astonished when Mr. Gascoyne very pointedly introduced
me as a cousin. I suppose my Semitic appearance had hardly prepared
him for the news. Since, however, I was a relation he could not doubt
my general authenticity.

Personally I would much sooner Mr. Gascoyne had not been so ready to
insist on my being of Gascoyne blood.

I walked home wondering whether after all Mrs. Gascoyne was not
mistaken.

I had studied Miss Gascoyne very carefully, and I could not detect any
indications that she was likely to capitulate to Mr. Hibbert-Wyllie.
At the same time, she was outwardly an impassive woman, and
appearances might be deceptive.

I admired and desired her even beyond Sibella, certainly beyond
Sibella now that I was sure of the latter. I was not in the least
conscious of any absurdity in arranging my affections so as to
dovetail with my love for two women. Even theoretical polygamy comes
quite naturally to me, for all Jews are polygamists at heart, even if
as a nation they find it convenient to disown it. King Solomon, with
his enormous female collection, remains their typical domestic
character.

I desired Miss Gascoyne, and was determined to run the risk of asking
her to marry me, though I was perfectly aware that it was after
marriage that the battle would begin. She was not a woman to endure
tamely any insult to the conventions, and she was not likely to agree
with Dr. Johnson’s dictum: ‘Why, sir, a wise woman does not trouble
herself about her husband’s infidelities.’ Domestic life would be a
different matter if this were a recognised rule, which woman was
brought up to regard as a principle of life. It is a fact, however,
which a wise woman learns early, that a man’s infidelities need not in
any way affect his supreme devotion to a particular female. The
objection that in that case a woman should have the same privilege is
childish, and can of course be refuted on the most elementary
utilitarian grounds. If she desired such liberty, a fact which I doubt
in the case of the normal woman, I think matters would have been
differently arranged, and a more elastic scheme of rearing the young
in civilised communities established. I certainly was prepared to
sustain my passion for both women, and if society made it difficult,
why, I must meet society with its own weapons. I was not going to
agree to forego one woman because to a slightly greater degree I
desired the other.

I might find out when matters settled down, as I hoped one day they
would, that I loved Sibella the better. At present she was at a
disadvantage, as the woman possessed always must be, by the side of
the woman unpossessed. It was not perhaps brains that lifted Miss
Gascoyne above Sibella; it was character. Miss Gascoyne would have
sacrificed everything for principle. I could not imagine Sibella
sacrificing much, even for prejudice.

I lived for the next few weeks in the greatest suspense. Mr.
Hibbert-Wyllie was constantly at the Gascoynes’, and I was startled by
a false report that the engagement was arranged and about to be
announced. I heard it at Lady Pebworth’s. Her ladyship was a sort of
cousin of Mr. Hibbert-Wyllie’s. It turned out to be a false rumour,
but I spent a sleepless night. I spoke to Mr. Gascoyne about it the
next day at the office.

“I hear that Mr. Hibbert-Wyllie and Miss Gascoyne are engaged.”

“Good gracious, I’ve heard nothing about it.”

In my relief I laughed gaily. “Then there can’t be any truth in it.”

“Who told you?”

“I heard it at Lady Pebworth’s.”

“Then it is evidently expected. If it takes place it is a match of my
wife’s making, but I shouldn’t wonder if after all she were
disappointed.”

“It would be a splendid match,” I said, hypocritically.

He looked at me keenly.

“You are very clever at disguising your feelings, Israel. I had no
idea you were so subtle.”

I had made a mistake, and appeared before him for one moment in my
true character.

“Where a woman is concerned men discover unexpected attributes.”

“That is true.” He was too tactful to pursue the subject of my
admiration for Miss Gascoyne further, and continued: “No one has a
greater respect for rank and its obligations than my niece. At the
same time, I don’t think a throne would tempt her to lie about her
feelings.”

I was lunching with Grahame that day. We had not seen each other for
some time, but his steady blue eyes met mine with no diminution of
friendship. He was at the moment slave to a romance of a most
inconvenient type. He had fallen in love with quite a common girl, and
was unhappy when she was out of his sight. Luckily there was no
question of his marrying her. Had it been necessary I verily believe
he would have done so, for his heart compelled all sacrifices.

“We never see each other now, Israel.”

I knew how to appeal to Grahame.

“Does that matter with a friendship as strong as ours?”

“Of course it does not affect our friendship, but still one likes to
see one’s friends now and then.”

“Has it been altogether my fault?”

“Well, I suppose not,” admitted Grahame.

“I’ll put you to the test. Let us go out of town from Saturday till
Monday. I know a ripping little seaside hotel, and I love the sea in
winter.” He coloured and looked confused, and I added quickly: “You
can’t come?”

“Well, I——”

“Don’t prevaricate, Grahame. Of course you can’t come. In the first
place, you have promised to take her to a theatre on Saturday evening.
You are lunching with her on Sunday. You are driving her to the Star
and Garter at Richmond to tea in the afternoon, and you are coming
back to dine somewhere very luxurious with her in the evening.”

He laughed. “That’s very near it.”

“And in two years’ time, or even sooner, her face won’t stir a passing
emotion in you.”

“Don’t, Israel, you hurt.”

“I’m sorry, but if you did come away you would be thinking of nothing
but her the whole time.”

“I am afraid you are right.”

“You are a sentimentalist, Grahame, only, thank goodness, not a
maudlin one, and sentimentalists are only possible during the
_entr’actes_.”

“Thanks.”

My liking and friendship for Grahame were a proof of how sincere I
could be if people did not stand in the way of my great design. I
suppose I ought to have felt some remorse, considering that Sibella
was his sister, but after all such relationships are purely
accidental. The fact remains that Grahame might have asked for almost
any sacrifice that did not interfere with my slow subterranean
tunnelling to the Gascoyne peerage.



Chapter XVI

Miss Gascoyne refused Mr. Hibbert-Wyllie. I was first made aware of
this fact by the announcement in the _Morning Post_ that he had left
London, and proposed to go for a six weeks’ yachting cruise in the
Mediterranean.

I hastened to call on Mrs. Gascoyne when I knew she would be alone.

“So very extraordinary, Israel,” she said. “I had almost looked upon
the thing as settled, but she refused him point-blank. It’s my first
and last attempt at match-making. I think Mr. Hibbert-Wyllie in his
inmost heart was a little surprised. He took it very well, poor
fellow, although I believe he felt quite broken-hearted. It’s very
strange, for it’s not like Edith to lead a man on and then throw him
over.”

“Did she lead him on?” I asked.

“Surely you must have seen that?”

“Well, I can’t exactly say that I did.”

“But they went everywhere together, picture-galleries, concerts,
theatres, lectures.”

“Who asked him?” I interjected, slily.

Mrs. Gascoyne was one of those straight-dealing folk to whom it was
perfectly possible to point out a mistake in judgment without creating
an unfriendly atmosphere.

“Do you mean to suggest that the mischief has been of my doing,
Israel?”

“Dear lady, I mean to say that in your unselfish anxiety to marry your
niece brilliantly you imagined a state of things which did not exist.”

“Exactly; you mean that I’m a dreadful old mischief-maker.”

“You know I don’t mean that.”

I always adopted in my attitude towards Mrs. Gascoyne a touch of
ingenuousness which I found eminently effective. It impressed her with
a strong belief in my sincerity; in fact, talking to her I have known
myself believe in my own sincerity, so free from guile was her manner
of thought and speech.

A conviction, the result of some reflection, had forced itself upon me
that with my secret inevitably striving to write itself on my face and
manner it would be well to cultivate as much as possible the society
of the simple-minded, in order to borrow something of their mood. Mood
is everything in influencing surroundings. I am still unable to see
why a murderer should not go through life with a perfect inward peace,
providing his associates are the right people. Apart from a certain
love of secret romances, I prefer the society of the simple-minded and
the good; just as in order to preserve a proper balance of mind so
much time should be spent in the country and so much time in town:—a
constant going from the artificial to nature and back again from
nature to the artificial. A right proportion of light and shade is a
great factor in human happiness.

“I trust Edith means to marry,” continued Mrs. Gascoyne. “It would be
a crime if so much charm and character were wasted.”

“Do you think it is necessarily wasted because a woman does not
marry?”

“I am old-fashioned, Israel, and I think a woman’s vocation is
marriage.”

“A great many women must be without a vocation,” I laughed.

“That is no reason why as many as have the opportunity should not
fulfil it. Now, when you marry, Israel——”

At that moment Miss Gascoyne entered the room. She was a little
embarrassed, as if she were aware that I knew all about Wyllie’s
proposal and her refusal.

She was not the woman to dismiss a lover lightly and with a mere
sensation of triumph at her own conquest. She had, I was sure,
suffered in a way which most women would not have done.

With most women the dismissal of a lover brings with it a certain
feeling of power. It is the one moment at which their sex can be truly
said to rule.

Miss Gascoyne’s manner had in it a trace of sadness, probably, I
thought, expressive of regret that she had been unable to accept as a
husband a man whom she thoroughly respected and who perhaps she even
felt was in many ways her natural mate. Perhaps the event had led to a
certain amount of retrospection and analysis of her own feelings.
Lovers are modest, yet at the same time I fancy a favoured lover has
as a rule a very fair impression that he is not distasteful, however
fluttered he may be before he has made sure of his prize. So by some
curious undercurrent flowing between us I gathered that Miss Gascoyne
was more interested in my visits than she had ever been before. I had
nothing very tangible to go on. There was no sudden development of
coquetry, such as a smaller-minded woman would have displayed. She
showed towards me the same even friendship, and we did not see more of
each other. Perhaps I gathered the increasing warmth of her feelings
from a certain relief and gladness at my arrival which even she could
not conceal, or it might have been from a certain deference to my
opinion.

To the ordinary observer it would have appeared almost incredible that
this queenly, beautiful creature of good birth should prefer a
stockbroker’s clerk to Mr. Hibbert-Wyllie, one of the richest men in
England, and connected with half the peerage. Busybodies would have
argued that her pride, her sense of family, had always been stronger
than her affections; which would have shown how very wrong busybodies,
who are necessarily limited to a judgment based on the superficial,
can be.

I had taken Grahame Hallward to see the Gascoynes, at Mr. Gascoyne’s
special invitation. The latter had met him with me in the City, and
had conceived a great liking for him.

“You can always tell a man by his friends, Israel,” he had said to me,
“and young Hallward seems an altogether delightful fellow.”

I could not forbear smiling. As a rule, it may be true that birds of a
feather flock together, and that a man can be judged by the company he
keeps, but at the same time it is curious what a man will put up with
in the friend of his heart. The friendship of Grahame Hallward and
myself was not dependent on any strong community of tastes and
interests. It was the outcome of his own loyal nature, which, having
made a friend, held to him. Mrs. and Miss Gascoyne liked him from the
first.

He grasped the situation between Miss Gascoyne and myself at once, and
he was the one person with whom I permitted myself to discuss it. He
was enthusiastic in his admiration.

“She is a queenly woman, Israel. Have you known her long?”

“About a year.”

“Well, you’re a lucky chap.”

“What do you mean?”

“Mustn’t I discuss the matter? Tell me to shut up, and I will.”

“You know I will discuss anything with you.”

He gave me an affectionate look.

“Are you struck, Israel?”

“All of a heap.” I always adopted a fresh, breezy way of talking with
Grahame. I think that is why he believes in my innocence to this day,
and also why he is suffering so much. He never saw the corners of my
character, although he had known me so many years. I always appeared
to him frank and affectionate.

“She’ll suit you better than Sibella would have done.”

Had I been without the ambitions I was possessed of, Miss Gascoyne
would have done nothing of the kind. Sibella’s decadent temperament
would have furnished me with far more entertainment. But Edith
Gascoyne was on the road to my objective. She was the most natural
mistress in the world for Hammerton Castle.

“It’s all rot my thinking of such a thing,” I said, true to the
character in which I instinctively appeared before Grahame. “She’s got
money of her own, and I’m a beggarly stockbroker’s clerk with three
hundred and fifty a year.”

“Judging by Mr. Gascoyne’s manner, I should say he meant you to be a
little more than that one of these days.”

“Oh, I’m not such a hypocrite as to pretend that it doesn’t look as if
he meant to do something for me, but I may have ever so long to wait
till then.”

“Don’t you make any money on your own account?”

“Oh, a bit—nothing to speak of.”

Grahame must have mentioned Miss Gascoyne to Sibella, because the next
time I called she asked me why I had never spoken of her.

“I don’t know, I’m sure,” I answered, carelessly.

I was glad that Grahame had saved me the trouble of breaking the fact
of her existence to Sibella. I was on perfectly good terms with the
latter now, and she had quite overcome any scruples about deceiving
“poor Lionel.” She had in fact not known her own decadence till I had
exploited it for her. She was revenged by my becoming intensely
jealous of her. After all, she was meeting daily a great number of men
who were willing to dance attendance on her till further notice, and
it was impossible and unnatural that she should not find some of them
attractive, and having been taught infidelity she might profit only
too well by the instruction. I behaved with the greatest discretion. I
had no mind to have all my plans upset by a divorce case. Mr. Gascoyne
would inevitably have shown me the door, whilst my chances with Miss
Gascoyne would have disappeared entirely. No, if I could not give up
so delirious a vice as Sibella it behoved me to be very careful, and I
think I can flatter myself that Lionel never had the least suspicion.
I suppose a guilty wife must always be in dread of disclosing her
secret in the hours of sleep, like the lady in the opera, but I don’t
think Sibella was sufficiently disturbed by the consciousness of sin
to have her very sound slumbers interrupted.

I was jealous of her, and however much I might upbraid myself for such
a weakness I was unable to control it. Woman-like, she very soon
discovered the fact, and I was somewhat at her mercy.

Sooner or later, she must inevitably learn all about Miss Gascoyne’s
existence, and I was glad that Grahame had broken the ice.

“She is very beautiful, is she not?”

“I believe she is considered lovely.”

“Then I can’t understand your not having mentioned her.”

There was a touch of asperity in Sibella’s voice.

“Why should I mention her?”

“Because as far as I can make out you are there constantly.”

“It is to my advantage to make myself agreeable to Mr. and Mrs.
Gascoyne, and,” I added hastily, for I never appeared as acting from
interested motives more than I could help, “I am very fond of them.”

“And very fond of Miss Gascoyne.”

Sibella’s was not the nature to exercise much control over rising
jealousy.

“What nonsense! As far as that goes, you would not have much to
complain of if I were to marry Miss Gascoyne.”

She looked at me with frightened eyes.

“If I thought you meant that——” she faltered.

“Well, you must remember that you and I might have fulfilled our
natural destiny and married.”

Sibella laughed in a not altogether nice way.

“That would have been a very pleasant arrangement. We should have been
so comfortably off, shouldn’t we?”

It gave me an advantage to pretend that it was a cause of eternal
grief to me that we were not married, so I answered:

“Well, I’ve no doubt we could have scraped along.”

“Scraped along!” And she laughed again, but she was not nearly so
amused as I was at hearing myself use such an expression. “I can’t
imagine either of us, Israel, scraping along. We should have hated
each other in a week.”

“We should never have done that, Sibella. We have a sub-consciousness
of each other’s weaknesses, and we know each other’s good points
better than anyone else could. We should always love each other.”

“I think, Israel, if I had not been so sure that you loved me, I
should not have risked marrying Lionel. I could never have believed
that good looks could bore one so soon.”

“I believe that good-looking people who are stupid get on one’s nerves
sooner than plain people who are stupid. The latter do feel that they
must make an effort. The former are supremely well contented, and
seldom take the trouble to make themselves agreeable.”

“Lionel is not only stupid, he is a little vulgar.”

Sibella’s frank recognition of the faults of her belongings had always
been in striking contrast to Grahame’s loyalty, which would allow no
disparagement of anyone he was allied to.

“I suppose we shall settle down one of these fine days,” continued
Sibella. “We shall get tired of scheming for interviews, and plotting
and planning our lives so as to make them fit with a secret.”

“My dear Sibella, I had no idea you were such a philosopher. I thought
your reflections never carried you further than the moment.”

“Oh, I didn’t think it out myself. I read it in a book, but I feel it
to be true, all the same.”

“You mean we shall tire of each other?”

“Yes.”

“Then we shall be tired of each other, and in that condition of
affairs there is no pain.”

Sibella’s two blue lakes—in which to those who could read there swam
any amount of moral fishiness—brimmed over.

“Don’t talk like that, Israel. I do love you, although you may not
believe it. If I had known all I know now about my feelings before I
got married I do not think I could have been induced to marry Lionel.”
And she wept.

I took her in my arms and kissed the moist rose of her lips and
caressed her yellow hair. Most men dislike seeing a woman in tears; to
the artist in romance it has its value if he keep his real sympathies
well in the background.

“I should like to know the Gascoynes, Israel.”

This had been inevitable. I had not the least wish for Sibella and
Edith to be made known to each other. Not that in the case of such
diverse characters there was likely to be the least exchange of
confidences, but they were certainly better apart. I could not imagine
Miss Gascoyne approving of Sibella; I could not conceive Sibella
understanding Miss Gascoyne, or thinking her other than somewhat of a
prig.

I betrayed not the least perturbation at her request, however.

“Of course you must meet,” I said, “but you know how I hate
premeditated introductions. They are never a success.”

Sibella, woman-like, looked unconscious of any reticence on my part on
the subject, but I felt that she suspected it. Well, she had been made
aware of Miss Gascoyne’s existence in as tactful a manner as possible.

“What would you do if I were to marry, Sibella?” This was a question I
was very fond of asking her.

“I don’t know; it all depends on whom you married, and whether you
married for love, or——”

“Or interest, you mean. I could not do the former very well, as I am
in love with you, but you must admit it would be foolish not to do the
latter.”

“I suppose there is something in marrying for love,” said Sibella, a
little gloomily.

“In the poorer classes I should think it meant everything. In the case
of the well-to-do it is nothing like so important.”

“I thought I was in love with Lionel.”

“Yes, Sibella, to do you justice I believe you did.”

“And when I discovered that I was not it was too late to draw back.”

Like all people in love we derived a never-ending pleasure from going
backwards and forwards over the whole psychological battle-ground of
our romance.

Lionel was often out of the way. He aspired to lead the life of a very
smart young man indeed. He confided to me that it was somewhat of a
mystery to him that in all the years he had been about town he had
only lately succeeded in getting into the particular set he desired to
mix with. He was a member of one or two extremely select clubs,
although the absolute holy of holies he could not enter, despite the
fact that Sir Anthony was still as far off Sibella as he had ever
been—at least, such was my impression. The infatuated baronet was
prepared to thrust Lionel down the throats of his most intimate
circle.

Sir Anthony might have a curious pronunciation of the Queen’s English,
which dispensed with final “g’s,” and clipped the majority of words in
an altogether surprising manner; he might wear checks which to a chess
enthusiast would at once have suggested a problem; he might have a
partiality for spats and white bowlers; he might even swear
occasionally in the presence of women, but in spite of all these
things he remained undeniably a gentleman; for being a gentleman has
nothing to do with grammar or morals. In time a street urchin may
acquire the one, and a Nonconformist parson may have the other, but
the fact of being a gentleman resides in the individual’s
consciousness. Therefore it is useless for those to whom public
companies and cheeses and cheap teas have stood for the goose with the
golden eggs to watch my lord’s peculiarities or the characteristics of
even plain John Brown, gentleman. They never can be gentlemen. Their
sons may. Their sons’ sons surely will be, but they themselves will
feel conscious that they are not the right article till their dying
day. They may be the best of fellows, the most upright of men, the
most polished of speakers, but they will hear it whispered behind
their backs every now and then that “Hang it all, the man’s not a
gentleman, you know!”

And I am convinced that had I, Israel Rank, been completely a
gentleman on both sides I could never have penned the above snobbish
paragraph. It is the reticence of gentlemen, and their lack of
statement of claim, that keeps up all the barriers and holds democracy
at bay.

Lionel Holland might have felt more secure if his father had sent him
to Eton and Oxford, which he could well have afforded to do, but to
old Mr. Holland these were almost mythical places. Lionel himself
spoke with characteristic unkindness of his father for not having done
so. He was, fortunately for himself, impervious to many slights and
snubs which would have driven a more self-respecting youth back into
his own circle.

When I had first advised him to go in for politics I did not imagine
the matter would have been so easily arranged. Another and a cleverer
man, equally rich, might have waited for years for such an
opportunity. The seat he was selected to contest happened, however, to
be in that part of the country in which lay Sir Anthony Cross’s
estate, and what with Sir Anthony’s own influence and the influence of
the people around with whom he was connected by ties of marriage or of
interest, he was practically able to secure Lionel’s election. If the
latter had the least notion of Sir Anthony’s real motive for all this
attention he was evidently prepared to accept it, and laugh in his
sleeve at the fool who was carrying his pigs to such a bad market. The
son of the man who had risen to wealth from the position of a street
boy had plenty of shrewd cunning, and could bide his time. Men of high
and noble honour and unstainable integrity do not make fortunes, or at
least very rarely, and the valuable qualities of those who do are not
as a rule lost in a generation.



Chapter XVII

My affairs stood thus. I proposed to marry Miss Gascoyne if I could,
but I had no notion of breaking with Sibella.

All this time I was closely debating which of the obstacles in my way
I should remove next.

There had been three Henry Gascoynes. The youngest was gone. There
remained two, and one of them, nearly ninety, was scarcely worth
considering. He was hardly likely to marry, and if he did so children
were almost out of the question, although I had not made myself
acquainted with his physical condition and method of life. He lived
the existence of a recluse on a miniature estate somewhere in the lake
district. None of the Gascoynes that I was acquainted with had ever
met him.

The remaining Henry Gascoyne was a parson and a childless widower. He
was sixty-two years of age. His cure was in Lincolnshire, and one of
the very few livings still worth having. The eminently spiritual
method of selection practised by the Established Church was testified
to by the fact that the living had been the gift of his wife’s father,
and the claims of a curate who had done the work of the parish for
thirty years, representing the valetudinarian and octogenarian vicar,
had been passed over. Country livings are an appanage of family, not
of church. Even that good old-fashioned custom, however, is going with
the diminution in the value of tithes. It is no use struggling to
retain what is not worth having.

Henry Gascoyne must be my next victim if I were not to play the coward
and draw back, wasting so much good work already done. The very “if”
that entered into my mind warned me that my nerve could not endure for
ever. I had thought the preservation of nerve merely a question of
self-control, but as I grew older I realised that there were many and
complex human emotional developments in perpetual siege of that
valuable attribute.

One thing at a time, and as it would not be advisable to try my luck
with Miss Gascoyne just yet, I decided to devote myself to inquiring
into the affairs of the Reverend Henry Gascoyne.

Each undertaking of the kind became more and more difficult to manage.
An introduction to the Reverend Henry Gascoyne would tie my hands. My
presence on the occasion of a third Gascoyne dying a tragic death
might become the subject of remark, and once the hue and cry was
raised evidence might accumulate rapidly enough, and, as is often the
case, most unexpectedly. Even Ughtred Gascoyne’s death might become a
support to suspicion, though there might never be any direct proof
that I had had a hand in it. Indeed, it was prolonged reflection on
this matter that made me realise that my nerve was not an impregnable
fortress.

Still, I could not draw back. What duty is to many people my ambition
was to me. It had to be gone through, though hell fire waited for me
when it was attained. It was not that I was incapable of rehearsing
the penalties of failure, but that I realised that if once I let my
imagination loose among such possibilities chaos would ensue.

I took down Crockford’s and perused it. The Reverend Henry Gascoyne
had been ordained at twenty-three. Evidently the valetudinarian rector
was on his last legs at the time, and it had been advisable to have
his successor in readiness. On going into the matter it turned out to
be as I expected. After spending two years as curate of a smart West
End church he had stepped into the living of Lye.

Lye was in Lincolnshire. If I wished to discover further particulars
about my reverend cousin there appeared to be no other way than by
going down to the village. I was not at the time quite as free as I
had been formerly. Mr. Gascoyne had grown to expect me on Sundays, if
not to lunch, to dinner, and I think he considered it as somewhat of a
slight if I did not appear. I was looked upon as the son of the house,
and he certainly had a right to expect something of a son’s duty in
return for the uniform kindness he had shown me. Not that he was
likely to display resentment at my going out of town for a day or two,
but it would involve explanations, and explanations involved
deception, and deception involved the danger of being found out. To
say I was going to one place when I was going to another meant the
possibility of being discovered, and so far I had kept singularly
clear of petty deception.

I decided that some friends in a humble walk of life might be useful,
and invented a family called Parsons, the name suggested by the quarry
I was hunting. They had, I explained, been good to me when I was a
poor lad at Clapham, and had now gone to live in the country. To avoid
committing myself I wrote down every particular about them which I
might be questioned on, and learned them off by heart. I introduced
their name casually into the conversation at dinner at the Gascoynes’.

Yes, I told them, in replying to questioning, there was Mrs. Parsons
and her son and a daughter. Mr. Parsons was dead. His son had always
loved the country, and having inherited a small farm from an uncle, he
and his mother and sister had gone to live on it. Was the daughter
pretty? I did not know. I had not seen her for some years, and girls
change so. The son was the same age as I was. No, we had not gone to
the same school, and he did not know Grahame Hallward. Our
acquaintance had come of our living near each other.

I changed the subject as soon as possible.

Soon after I found occasion to say that I had met young Parsons in
London, and that he had asked me to go down and spend a few days at
their farm near Norwich. I felt the whole thing to be lamentably
clumsy. It would have been better to get to know someone near Mr.
Gascoyne’s rectory, but it was done, and as soon as I had finished
with the Parsons family I intended to ship them all off to Canada,
where there are as many farms as the imagination can desire.

When I declared that I must accept their invitation, or Mrs. Parsons
and her children would be hurt, I fancy Miss Gascoyne’s face lighted.
I was sure that she had endowed me with all sorts of good qualities to
which I could lay no claim. She was touched at my consideration for
the Parsons’ feelings. She was a woman incapable of giving love where
she could not give respect.

The world only knowing me through the medium of a trial for murder has
no doubt made up its mind that anyone who could respect me must have
been a very bad judge of character. The world, however, is not itself
a very good judge of character. To man, his fellow-creatures are as a
rule divided into two classes, viz.: the penny plain and twopence
coloured. If Mr. Brown has been found with Mr. Jones’s wife, Mr. Brown
is a complete and wholly irreclaimable blackguard. That he has been an
honest citizen, an attentive husband, and an irreproachable father
hitherto counts for nothing. These virtues only aggravate the offence,
inasmuch as they are shown by the nature of his guilt to have been
mere hypocrisies. Public exposure is the real guilt in his
fellow-men’s eyes. The old, old crime of being found out is the
unforgivable offence. They know in their hearts that he is rather a
fine fellow, that his slip is what might have happened to any of them.
They have probably some such little liability still unpaid standing to
their own account, but this does not make them one whit the less
severe in judging their foolish fellow who has been discovered. It is
thus. A man who has been in the dock and has been convicted loses the
right to claim any virtues. As for a man who has been convicted of
murder! What can be said for him? Just as he has been found guilty of
the crime the law holds most wicked, so must he be capable of
committing all those crimes which murder is supposed to take
precedence of.

Yet Miss Gascoyne was right, and the world was wrong. She had seen the
best side of me, and—at the risk of appearing egotistical and
conceited—there was much to respect in my character, especially as
seen by her, and it was by no means all spurious virtue. I had a sound
judgment. I was no snob, and I was not only well read, but I had
musical accomplishments, which—strange in a woman of her birth and
country breeding—she did not despise. She deemed me loyal, and so I
was, with limitations. Above all, she loved me—of that I was now
sure—and everything I had to show in the shape of goodness shone, as
will do the deeds of her lover in the eyes of woman. She took a much
truer view of my character than the public have done so far. I was
kind-hearted; this she had discovered for herself, and, curiously
enough, without my putting the fact too obviously before her.

I already saw myself married to her, and I could not help thinking of
the importance it would give me in the eyes of the world to have been
accepted by the beautiful Miss Gascoyne, who had refused almost the
finest match in England. People would hardly credit it, and it
certainly was necessary to know Miss Gascoyne in order thoroughly to
understand her action.

I went on my visit to the imaginary Parsons family, and when I
returned was compelled to invent still further details for Miss
Gascoyne’s benefit. She was interested in everything I did, and asked
all manner of questions about them, down to minute details as to what
young Parsons grew most on his farm.

“Really,” I laughed, “I didn’t ask.”

“That’s not very like you, Mr. Rank. You generally want to know
everything. Your capacity for picking up information has always
surprised me.”

“We were too occupied in talking over old times,” I answered, and the
conversation was diverted to a good-natured bantering on my
inquisitive ways.

I had, however, seen the Reverend Henry Gascoyne, and had even heard
him preach. The village of Lye lay right out in the midst of the fens
of Lincolnshire. In the autumn—the time at which I visited it—it
looked well enough, but in the winter I should think it must have been
dreary beyond description. The village itself clustered round the
church, a fine old building dating from about the year twelve hundred.
It was partly in ruin; indeed, it was a question whether it had ever
really been completed. The interior depended for its beauty on the
design, for it had all the coldness and inhospitable aspect of the
average English country church where the incumbent has been untouched
by the High Church movement. There was a Communion Table which might
have been anything, but for its position, and a dusty Litany lay on
the desk. The walls were covered with memorials to the Hutchins, the
family of Mr. Gascoyne’s wife, from whom he had received the living.

There was a brand-new bronze tablet—somewhat of a relief after the
black-edged marble mementoes of the rest of the Hutchins family—to the
memory of Mary Gascoyne, the beloved wife of Henry Gascoyne, incumbent
of the parish, with a space for the name of the Reverend Henry when he
should be carried, by a power stronger than his own, from the comforts
of Lye Rectory to that land, the glories and happinesses of which he
expatiated upon every Sunday, but which he was in no hurry to set out
for.

The Reverend Henry was none of your new-fangled parsons who carry the
teachings of the New Testament uncomfortably into private life. As for
testing social conditions from the Book of Books, it had never entered
his head. Christianity was an ideal, and you were to get as near to it
as possible. As parson, the only difference between himself and his
parishioners lay in the fact that it was incumbent upon him to
preserve a greater staidness of demeanour than the neighbouring
gentry. Not that he was nearly as staid and solemn as his
brother-in-law, Sir Robert Hutchins, who sat in the family pew on
Sunday mornings and evenings, a monument of respectability and
convention.

Neither, judging by the somewhat florid colouring of his face, did the
Reverend Henry hold with temperance doctrines. Indeed, I heard that
this matter caused some dispute between him and Sir Robert Hutchins,
and that the brothers-in-law were not on the best of terms. It pleased
Sir Robert Hutchins to hold a sort of informal service in the village
schoolroom every Sunday afternoon, when those who were of a
Methodistical turn of mind could hold forth and give addresses and so
work off their schismatic steam. Sir Robert was of opinion that the
Reverend Henry should have fallen into line with his truly
statesmanlike scheme, but the Reverend Henry was in the habit of
spending his Sunday afternoon with his port, gazing sleepily from his
long dining-room windows across the pleasant Lincolnshire landscape,
and he informed his brother-in-law that he was not sure that loyalty
to the church would permit him to sit and listen to the outpourings of
Mr. Butt, the carpenter, or Mr. Shingle, the village grocer; and that
a really well thought out and carefully delivered sermon was a greater
strain than his brother-in-law had any conception of. He declared that
it very often took the whole afternoon before his nerves had fully
recovered from the effort. At this Sir Robert murmured something about
clergymen being always so ready to take care of those bodies which
they taught other people to despise. Then the Reverend Henry grew
mightily offended, and replied with cutting sarcasm that he knew that
Nonconformity usually had a contempt for the appointed ministers of
the church, but that if his brother-in-law wished to show his contempt
he had better withdraw to West Lye on Sundays, where there was enough
irreverent and blasphemous Psalm-singing and taking of the Lord’s name
in vain to satisfy the most egotistical of schismatics. But even when
he expressed himself in this highly independent and manly fashion he
was so completely the slave of convention as to feel that it was
highly improper for an incumbent to be speaking to his patron in such
a way; the patron of a living standing—in the sort of nebulous
hierarchy which he had constructed in his own head—somewhere between
the parson and the Deity.

All of this information I obtained at the village inn from general
conversation. It appeared to have been conveyed to the community from
the servants at the Rectory and the Hall, and had evidently lost
nothing in the telling.

I attended the service, and saw my reverend cousin for the first time.
I am bound to say I rather liked him, in spite of the suggestion of
good living in his face. He looked frank and honest. He conducted the
service in a nice, gentlemanly way, and preached an exceedingly good
sermon on scandal and tale-bearing. There appeared, from the knowing
looks of the parishioners, to have been some special scandal of late
in the village, for everyone glanced at his neighbour as much as to
say, “I hope this will be a lesson to you for the term of your natural
life.”

I seated myself behind a pillar so that I could get a good view of the
parson when he was not looking, and could disappear from sight when
his gaze wandered in my direction.

The service over, Mr. Gascoyne retired through the Rectory garden in
the company of a lady and a young girl, who I afterwards learned were
his sister and her daughter. He was a great sportsman and an excellent
shot, but I suppose in deference to his cloth he drew the line at
eating the game he killed. From what I could gather I should think he
was quite alive to the humour of this inconsistency.

I wandered about the churchyard and watched the verger lock the great
doors and shuffle out of the wicket gate across the dusty road to his
cottage. A silence descended over the village. As I walked round and
round the church, pretending to be absorbed in the gravestones, I was
racking my brains for some means of carrying out my design on the
estimable cleric who was at that moment sitting down to roast mutton
and claret as a preliminary to his afternoon port.

Two schemes arose in my brain simultaneously. At the west end of the
church there were some ruined arches, which were no doubt the ruins of
the unfinished north and south transept. I looked at them with
interest. The stonework was crumbling woefully, and it would not be a
very difficult matter to detach a brick. The decaying masonry also
suggested that it would be easy to climb to the top of the arch, where
there was a buttress, the shadow of which might at night furnish
absolute concealment to anyone bold enough to scale it. A large stone
thrown accurately on the head of anyone passing beneath it would be
almost bound to kill. It was a risky proceeding. Anyone coming from a
certain part of the village would inevitably use the short cut, and
pass under the arch on the way to the Rectory. How was I to know,
however, when the Reverend Henry was likely to pass that way,
especially as from all accounts he very seldom went out at night? It
seemed as if I should have to give this idea up. I had to consider
also that the arch would be by no means a very pleasant thing to
climb, and that it might come to the ground under my weight. The risks
of the stone not falling on the right spot were also great. On the
other hand, it would be sure to look like an accident.

The other method was suggested by my seeing the vestry window open.
Looking in, the first thing that struck my eye was a table by the
window, on which were a bottle and glass. They had stood at the
preacher’s right hand during the sermon, and the Reverend Henry had
more than once had recourse to them. Was it possible to doctor the
water? The Rector would at least have a dramatic death in the pulpit.
I could not help smiling at the idea of his tumbling down the pulpit
steps in the midst of one of his most eloquent periods. It was worth
thinking out.

There was no more to be done at the moment, and as I did not wish to
become well known in the village I returned to London.

The next time I went into the district I intended to stay at a small
place some distance off, and use my bicycle.

On my arrival in town I was compelled, as I have said, to give a
minute account of the establishment of the imaginary Parsons.

Sibella was also anxious to know why she had not seen me for three
whole days, but I evaded her questions, and did not let myself in for
a repetition of the Parsons inventions.

About this time I was, through no wish of mine, introduced to Lord and
Lady Gascoyne. They had, since Miss Gascoyne’s arrival in South
Kensington, called every now and then on Mr. and Mrs. Gascoyne, and
had, I believe, taken a great fancy to the household. Lady Gascoyne,
dark, brilliantly pretty—the word beautiful would have been out of
place—was an American of very questionable birth, and had recognised
at once the real breeding that characterised her husband’s
unpretentious relations. She was very anxious for Miss Gascoyne to
visit them. Would they not all come to Hammerton? Lord Gascoyne warmly
seconded the invitation. Miss Gascoyne excused herself on the ground
of mourning. Lady Gascoyne had herself lost a brother, and her eyes
filled. He had been her father’s joy and hope. It was for him the
money had been made. She would not have been so rich if darling Louis
had been alive, but she would willingly give up all her fortune if it
could bring him back. I am afraid that if poor Louis had not died and
left his sister sole heiress it was hardly likely that she would have
been Lady Gascoyne. But they appeared to be a devoted couple, and she
talked almost incessantly of the little Viscount Hammerton, and Lord
Gascoyne himself talked of the child a great deal. Mrs. Gascoyne,
although the most delightful woman imaginable, was, after all, of
bourgeois extraction, and was somewhat impressed by the Earl and his
lady. She invariably gave me detailed accounts of their visits, and
was hoping that Mr. Gascoyne would accept the invitation to Hammerton.
Lady Gascoyne was going to bring little Lord Hammerton to see her. At
this Mrs. Gascoyne’s eyes filled with tears, thinking of her own boy,
and I suppose I ought to have felt uncomfortable.

We were all sitting peacefully one Sunday afternoon not making the
least effort to entertain one another, the surest sign of a perfect
community of feeling. Mr. and Mrs. Gascoyne were dozing on each side
of the fire. I was reading a book, and Miss Gascoyne was writing
letters, when Lord and Lady Gascoyne were announced.

“And I’ve brought Simmy,” said Lady Gascoyne, placing a bundle of lace
in Mrs. Gascoyne’s arms. “Our engagements for the afternoon fell
through, so we thought we would run over and see if you were in. Very
rude, isn’t it?”

Mrs. Gascoyne was holding Simeon, Viscount Hammerton, to her bosom.
She was a woman who had been destined by nature to be the mother of
many children. There is no mistaking the woman who is above all things
a mother when she has a child in her arms. She cannot assume anything
in the way of attitude which is not protective.

Mr. Gascoyne introduced me, and with characteristic good taste made no
mention of my being a distant cousin. I fancy when Mrs. Gascoyne said,
“Israel, come and admire the baby,” Lord Gascoyne looked a little
perplexed, as if it were a surprise to hear the name out of Petticoat
Lane. I went over, and was presented to Lady Gascoyne.

She gave me a little bow, very courteous, very distant, full of that
exaggerated reserve assumed by American women who have matched
themselves with a great position.

“I do not suppose you are interested in children,” she said.

“On the contrary, I love them, don’t I, Mrs. Gascoyne?”

“Mr. Rank adores them, Lady Gascoyne. He positively rains coppers on
poor children.”

This was perfectly true. How far my interest went beyond delight in
their beauty I cannot say. I sometimes wonder how anyone can love
anything but children. Their delicacy and sweetness are so exquisite
compared to the faded or grosser beauty of their elders.

I held out my arms, and to Lady Gascoyne’s great surprise took the
child with perfect confidence from Mrs. Gascoyne. I fancy Lady
Gascoyne was somewhat alarmed, but, mother-like, could not help
feeling flattered. As for Simeon, Lord Hammerton, he held out a little
fat hand, and clutched a piece of my cheek cooing wildly. I walked up
and down the room whilst the ladies laughed.

“By Jove,” said Lord Gascoyne, “that is more than I care to do,
Marietta. I am afraid he has marked your cheek, Mr. Rank.”

“Oh, that is nothing.”

“We shall never get to the end of your abilities,” smiled Miss
Gascoyne.

“What a splendid father you will make,” laughed Lady Gascoyne, and she
held out her arms to the child, but as I placed him in them his infant
lordship set up a shrill cry, which was immediately subdued when I
took him again and resumed my promenade with him.

There was a chorus of astonishment.

“Really,” said Lady Gascoyne, “I shall have to engage you as nurse, or
are you mesmerising Simeon? Is he mesmerising you then, darling?”

His lordship did not condescend to answer, but lay in my arms gazing
at her placidly. He dozed off, and I returned him to his mother. He
woke up, however, as they left, and held out his arms to me to be
taken.

“I shall always believe that you are a mesmerist,” laughed Lady
Gascoyne, as she said good-bye.

And thus it came about that I was introduced to Lord Gascoyne, and had
to make my plans accordingly. I began to think it very hard that none
of the family would die off naturally. It was really surprising how
many people there were to get rid of, and on paper they had seemed so
few.

I had by this time made up my mind that if opportunity occurred to
propose to Miss Gascoyne I would do so. I had received so many proofs
of her liking for me that I had come to the conclusion that I might
just as well try my luck now as wait. The evening of Lord and Lady
Gascoyne’s visit furnished the opportunity. It was after dinner, and
Mr. and Mrs. Gascoyne were dozing over the fire. Miss Gascoyne and I
had retreated to the billiard-room, where I sat and smoked cigarettes,
while she worked and talked to me. I was always very much at ease in
her company. The dignified repose which she emanated was eminently to
my liking. It was certainly a great contrast to the electrically
charged atmosphere of Sibella’s society.

“I am afraid I shall not know how to leave my aunt and uncle,” she
said. “They grow nervous at the mere idea.”

“Is there any need why you should leave them?” I asked.

“Well, of course I am very devoted to them, but at the same time I
think I am of rather an independent nature.”

“You mean that you would prefer an establishment of your own?”

“Well, yes, you see I have been spoilt. I have tasted freedom. Of
course it will be difficult to explain to my aunt and uncle that I am
quite devoted to them, that I am perfectly happy here, and yet that I
want to set up my own house.”

I laughed.

“Yes, it will be rather difficult, although at the same time I
perfectly understand what you mean.”

“I suppose it seems unnatural for a single woman to want a place of
her own; at any rate, until she’s thirty.”

“It doesn’t run in the blood. A bachelor takes a private apartment, a
spinster goes and lives in a boarding-house.”

“I am afraid it is quite true,” she answered, laughing, and then, with
that perfect frankness about her sex which was one of her
characteristics, she added, “But we spinsters—at least, that is, the
poor ones—have to get ourselves husbands. It is potential matrimony
that fills the boarding-house.”

“You consider matrimony a woman’s vocation?” I asked.

“I do.” And she looked grave.

My heart beat a little faster. I had made up my mind to put the
question. I continued: “And do you think marriages are happier if
based on a community of interests or on a passionate attachment?”

She looked at me honestly.

“I think,” she answered, “it is as impossible to generalise about
marriage as about other things. It only leads to false conclusions. Of
this, however, I am sure—if, when the flush of passion is past the
interests of husband and wife lie apart, their chance of happiness
cannot be very great. Don’t you agree?”

I did agree, and embroidered her conclusions with even stronger
argument. I was never cynical if I could help it with Miss Gascoyne;
it made her uncomfortable, and she had once told me that she believed
all cynics were rogues with a white feather. At least, she had read so
somewhere, and it had struck her as being true.

I went on to the discussion of romance. I talked vaguely of men who
had loved women infinitely above them.

“Even,” I ended, “as I love you, have always loved you, shall always
love you. I suppose I ought to have kept silence, but I believe you
are generous enough not to be angry with me for wishing you to know
how much I value you above all other women.”

I turned away apparently overcome, and watched the effect of my speech
in a looking-glass.

She was very moved, and her eyes filled with tears.

“Why should you not tell me?” she murmured, after a pause. From my
point of vantage I could see in her face that my cause was a winning
one.

“I ought not to have told you. I have hardly a shilling in the world.
I owe everything to Mr. Gascoyne, whilst you——” I broke off.

“Do you think women only value love when it is accompanied by worldly
advantage? Surely you are doing us an injustice. Won’t you believe?”

I turned on her eagerly. Really, now I come to think over the whole
scene, I must confess I played it uncommonly well. I was of course in
love with her. She did not rouse fire and passion in me as Sibella
did, but I was certainly in love. At the same time, I had none of the
modest views about myself to which I had pretended, and it is
decidedly difficult to play a half genuine love affair with the tongue
in the cheek.

I was somewhat afraid to take her in my arms; she had always been so
very stately, but I was surprised at the abandon with which she gave
herself to me. It was only for a moment, however; the natural dignity
of the woman reasserted itself.

“What on earth will they say?”

“I don’t think they will mind; they will only be surprised.”

I did not think Mr. Gascoyne would be at all annoyed, but I had a sort
of idea that Mrs. Gascoyne would not be pleased.

“Shall we tell them?”

I knew that she was a woman who would demand courage from the man she
loved even in little things.

“Why not?” I said.

So we walked into the drawing-room, and I said boldly: “Edith has
promised to be my wife.”

Mr. and Mrs. Gascoyne, awaked from their after-dinner slumber, gazed
at us in astonishment.

Mrs. Gascoyne’s face said as plainly as words could have done, ‘What,
refuse Mr. Hibbert-Wyllie, and accept Israel Rank; why, what are you
thinking of?’

Mr. Gascoyne looked from one to the other several times before he
spoke, saying finally, as he took her hands in his: “My dear, if I had
thought of it at all I should have thought that you were the woman to
prefer love and the approval of your own conscience to rank and
wealth.”

Mrs. Gascoyne, woman-like, could not forgive an event of the heart
which she had not foreseen.

“Of course you know your own affairs best, but——” She paused,
evidently changing her mind, and, being one of the sweetest women in
the world, rose, and kissing Edith, said: “My dear, I hope you will
both be very happy, and, after all, as Mr. Gascoyne says, position and
wealth are not everything.”

I think the dear lady derived a certain satisfaction from the idea
that our quartet would not be broken up. Certain it was that her
rancour, if it could be called by such a harsh name, was short lived,
and she entered into our schemes very heartily.

The next morning at the office Mr. Gascoyne called me into his private
room.

“My wife and I have been talking things over, and we think it just as
well that you should be told our intentions towards you. I hope this
business will be yours one day, and I am sure there is no one we
should wish to benefit more by what we have to leave than Edith’s and
your children.”

I stammered out my thanks, for I was really moved, and for a moment
could not help thinking of the son he had hoped would succeed him.



Chapter XVIII

But I had to tell Sibella.

I looked forward to this task with little relish. I had never seen her
in a really bad temper, but I was certain that she could be violent.
That was not all. She might break off our little affair, and my heart
almost stopped beating as I thought of the possibility. It was
essential, however, that I should tell her before she learned it from
anyone else. A woman can always bear unpleasant news from the man she
loves.

I found her alone and in a bad temper, complaining loudly of her woes.
She was being dunned for some bills Lionel knew nothing about. They
were living too extravagantly, she declared. They knew far too many
rich people. Why were old Mr. and Mrs. Holland such a long time dying?
She did not suppose for one moment they enjoyed their life. How could
they?

She then wanted to know almost fiercely why I was not rich. I ought to
pay some of her debts. It was only fair. Other people made money, why
could not I?

I explained that I was doing my best—that on the whole I did not think
I had done badly, and that I thought I should do better as time went
on.

That was just it, she retorted, with some attempt at wit, time did go
on.

I explained with almost brutal frankness—for the sooner she knew the
longer time I should have in which to conciliate her—that I proposed
to marry money in the person of Miss Gascoyne.

I was quite right; Sibella could be violent. At first she did not
believe me; then with white, quivering lips she implored me to tell
her it was not true. She was sorry she had been angry. She would
retract everything she had said if I would only tell her that it was
not true. It was intensely flattering to me to see how acutely she
suffered. Most certainly the days of misery I had endured for her sake
were amply avenged. I explained as gently as I could that it was
necessary for my welfare that I should marry. It was such a chance as
might not come again, and after all it need not make the least
difference to us—although on this point I was in my own mind by no
means sure. I saw looming up on the far distant horizon a very
unpleasant and nerve-testing state of things.

Poor Sibella realised with feminine quickness that the woman who has
the man in her house, and who, figuratively speaking, washes, cooks,
and cleans up for him, stands the best chance of securing his
heart—that part of a man’s body being inextricably bound up with other
and less romantic organs. Indeed, there is a community of dependence
on the same flow of blood, and an identity of relation to the same
scheme of physical machinery, which renders the fact inevitable.

She realised the possibilities involved in my having children, and in
the mutual interests which were sure to draw us together more and more
as time went on. As a consequence of these deductions, she wept
dismally.

She was not philosophic enough to reckon with my plurality of
disposition. As a woman, she might be forgiven for not being able to
do so. Neither was she philosophical enough to reckon with the time
when she would look back with amazement on that period when my
presence meant a certain ecstasy, a solution which nearly always comes
about if two people do not bind their lives together by a material
interest, or that more iron bond, usage. It is profitable to the man
who wishes to live by reason and not by mere feeling to reflect how
many millions of the couples who think themselves indispensable the
one to the other would have got on perfectly well with somebody else.
If Mrs. Brown had married Mr. Jones, would she not say in later years,
if she met Mr. Brown in the street:—“Fancy that old frump having made
love to me!” The sentimentalist fancies she would still look at Mr.
Brown with romantic eyes; not a bit of it. She would entirely have
forgotten how very slim his waist had been, how very bright his eye.
Believe me, we are not the individuals we think ourselves to be, but
are fish swimming in a sea of condition and circumstance of which we
all partake necessarily as we do of the air, the food, the ground
beneath our feet, the whole world around us. Brown, Jones, and
Robinson are much the same people, and the differentiation is largely
illusory.

Poor Sibella passed from pleading to violence. If I did not at once
break off my engagement she would know how to act. Lionel should know
all, and if he turned her out she would insist on coming to me. The
idea of Sibella’s worldly soul playing ducks and drakes with her
prosperity in that way out of mere revenge made me smile. Very well, I
could smile, but we should see. Miss Gascoyne should know how I had
betrayed my friend’s wife. I looked at her in surprise, and she
corrected herself; if Lionel was not my friend, Grahame was, and to
betray your friend’s sister was just as bad as betraying your friend’s
wife. As Sibella had no morals whatever on the subject, this was all
very amusing. My amusement, which I could not wholly conceal, enraged
her. People should know me for what I was, she declared. There had
always been something about me that she did not like, had never liked,
even when I was a boy. She had always suspected me of being a fraud in
some way or other.

This made me curious, and I encouraged her to go on. It was as well to
know what lay at the back of Sibella’s mind, especially if it were not
very flattering to what I had believed to be my powers of concealment,
but after all a woman with whom one has an illicit love affair sees
the worst side of one. I had no fear of Sibella telling Miss Gascoyne.
She might in a round-about way try and injure me in the latter’s eyes,
but I did not think she was likely to go further.

It was a trying scene, however. No man likes to see a woman whom he
loves suffer, and Sibella displayed a quite extraordinary amount of
resentment, considering that physical jealousy cannot in the nature of
things be as strong a passion with woman as with man.

“You will kiss her, and make love to her,” she moaned.

“My sweetheart,” I murmured, taking her in my arms, “you know
perfectly well that I do not love anyone in the wide world as well as
I do you—but just think what this marriage will do for me.”

“I have sacrificed so much for you, Israel; you might at least
sacrifice something for me.”

“My darling, I will make any sacrifice that you can show me is
necessary.”

“This is the end of everything between us, you will see. I shall never
be happy again.”

She was softening; the danger was over. I pointed out that she had
made the marriage she wanted to; she might at least allow me the same
privilege.

“I did not know that I was in love with you,” she whimpered.

I reasoned with her in the most winning way. I would send her a little
French novel, one of the most philosophical works I had ever read,
although presented as the lightest of fiction, a pill coated like a
sugar-plum. In it there were two people who had loved each other all
their lives, and kept their romance evergreen because they did not
marry. Marriage spoilt so many things. It was the microscope turned on
to the apparently limpid waters of romance. It showed a mass of
horrid, swirling, swimming, ugly things that there was no need to see.
Why use a microscope? She must have learned the evil of the
matrimonial microscope from Lionel. Delusions were as good as
realities if one were consistent. If we had been rich we might have
married each other. Therefore, poverty knew what was best for us, and
had been our most sincere friend.

I think I left her pacified; at least, to the extent of not being
dangerous. Lionel came in, and I was obliged to go.

I was compelled of course to spend a great deal of time at South
Kensington. Edith was radiantly happy, and her romance had brought
something into her face which it had hitherto lacked. I was very proud
of her. Poor Sibella, who had seen her at some public function, had
evidently not expected anything so beautiful, for she declared that I
must surely love so exquisite a creature better than herself. As a
matter of fact, Miss Gascoyne’s beauty, although of a higher type, was
not so dazzling as Sibella’s, and I could honestly say, “One admires
Miss Gascoyne, but one does not love her,” which had a very good
effect on Sibella. It was put authoritatively, and it convinced her.

I was now the son of the house at the Gascoynes’, and there was
Satanic humour in the situation. I moved among all these good people
as in some measure a substitute for the dead young man. Where
ignorance is bliss ’tis folly to be wise, is true sometimes, and what
did it matter to them if I were responsible for the son’s death? How
could it affect my filial attitude, providing they remained in
ignorance?

Mr. Gascoyne doubled my salary, and introduced me to the employés of
the firm as his successor. He began by degrees to leave the management
of affairs to me, and he did well, for he had grown just a little
old-fashioned, and the business certainly improved under my care; in
fact, it regained ground which it had lost.

About this time I had another piece of good fortune. It was not much,
but such as it was it was encouraging. Old Henry Gascoyne died,
leaving only the parson between me and the main branch—of course, with
the exception of my benefactor, Mr. Gascoyne.

Lord and Lady Gascoyne called in person to congratulate us on our
engagement. They welcomed me as cousin, and asked us all to Hammerton
for Christmas. Lady Gascoyne wanted to revive the good old-fashioned
Yule-tide. As she justly observed, “What is the use of having an
old-fashioned hall if you don’t use it as such?”



Chapter XIX

Miss Gascoyne and I were to be married the following spring. Why
people who want to get married and are in a position to get married
don’t do so at once I cannot understand. I fancy Mr. and Mrs. Gascoyne
would have liked us to live with them, but we resolutely declined to
accept any hints on the subject, and they were quite generous-minded
enough to see the justice of our objection. At the same time, they
regarded the departure of Edith from under their roof with no little
gloom.

Miss Gascoyne insisted on settling half her income on me. “I might,”
she said, laughing, “become weak-minded, or go off with some one else,
and it is only fair that you should not run the chance of being worse
off.” I protested, but on this point she was firm. If she had not done
this of her own accord, I think I should have found some means to
suggest that she should; for if a man marries money he lives in
greater style than he would otherwise have done, and it is not fair
that he should be left at the mercy of his wife in the event of their
parting, or should his own capacity for earning a living be impaired.

With Hammerton mine by right of descent, and Edith, beautiful and
stately, my wife and Countess, I should be on equal terms with the
great people of the land. It would obviously be stupid, therefore, to
stay my hand, and remain as I was. Lady Gascoyne might have more
children, and my task might grow more and more difficult as years went
on. At present I was devoting myself entirely to the removal of the
Reverend Henry. He, poor gentleman, continued to imbibe his Sunday
afternoon port and eat game he had not shot himself, all unconscious
of the kind friend who was bent on hastening his reunion with the wife
whose loss he so deplored. Indeed, I had justification for what I
contemplated, inasmuch as the bronze tablet to her memory declared
that his chief joy and hope lay in the prospect of their meeting,
though he no doubt philosophically reflected that the union was not
likely to be less joyful for being delayed a few years.

I had decided to give up the idea of launching decaying masonry at the
poor old gentleman’s head. A few experiments in this direction taught
me that I could not trust to my accuracy of aim. I abandoned the
project with a good deal of reluctance, because if successful it would
have been quite free from any danger of detection.

There remained the poisoning of his glass of water. How to get at it
was the question.

My plans were largely facilitated by the departure of Mr. and Mrs.
Gascoyne for Italy, taking Edith with them. They had long wished to
make a habit of evading the English winter, which agreed with neither
of them. They had intended to do so the following year, leaving the
business entirely in my hands, but the doctor suddenly ordered Mrs.
Gascoyne south.

She and her husband wished to leave Miss Gascoyne behind, but I
declined to hear of such a thing. I was only too glad to have her out
of London for the winter. She, on her part, directly she discovered
that Mr. and Mrs. Gascoyne wished her to accompany them, insisted on
going.

“Israel and I will see quite enough of each other after next spring,”
she said laughingly, in reply to their remonstrances.

They departed early in October and I was left free to carry out my
plans. They intended to be away seven months, and I was to join them
at Christmas on the Riviera. The arrangement had another good point.
Sibella was delighted at the prospect of a long winter with me all to
herself.

The first Saturday after the Gascoynes’ departure I went down to
Lincolnshire. It was an Indian summer, and as balmy as June. My
sensations were very different from those which the moral reader will
no doubt think ought to have animated the mind of a murderer. They
were entirely exhilarating and happy, and the pleasant Lincolnshire
landscape with the sunlit emerald of its far-stretching flats,
intersected by the glistening silver threads of canals, filled me with
the delight in Nature which only a thoroughly artificial mind can
feel. It may seem odd, but I was genuinely appealed to by the quaint,
brown barges with their gay notes of colour in green and red, the
trampling horses and the towing-line hauled taut, the jerseyed
helmsman alternately blowing at his pipe and whistling a tune. These
things I loved as much as the veriest Cockney artist let loose for the
first time among the joys of Nature with a sketch-book.

I was in a curious mood for one whose mission was death, and when I
caught sight of the tower of Lye Church above the stately elms which
were swaying in the fresh October breeze I felt almost sentimental. It
was not my intention to stay there, however, and I passed Lye Station
and alighted some three or four miles further on at a place called
Cumber. Here there was a very comfortable little inn, almost an hotel.

After dark I walked over to Lye, and hung round the comfortable
Rectory. Once I ventured a few paces on to the lawn, whence I could
see the Rector at dinner with his sister and niece. They appeared to
live prodigiously well, and it was very diverting to watch their
gestures and the process of mastication as they devoured something
they particularly liked, or to observe the Rector say something over
his shoulder to the butler, who immediately hurried forward to fill
his master’s glass.

I could not help reflecting that the silver candlesticks, the
gilt-framed pictures on the walls, the elaborate dishes, the
obsequious servants, were the appanage of one who had given a special
undertaking to imitate Christ and do His work by example. I was even
led into some no doubt highly foolish and irreverent reflections as to
which of us was the greater criminal—I, who at any rate told no lies
to myself, or this polished, good-natured hypocrite who had never
tested a single action by His teaching.

The meal over, the ladies left the room. Apparently no social
convention was omitted in this house of spiritual direction. When the
butler had placed a box of cigars on the table, and filled his
master’s glass, he also withdrew, and the Reverend Henry lit a cigar,
and, leaning back in his chair, half closed his eyes in ecstatic
enjoyment. At this point a step scrunched on the gravel path, and then
there was a ring at the front-door bell. In another minute or two a
gentlemanly-looking curate was shown into the room. He was evidently
an embryo Reverend Henry, and he was cordially waved to a seat. From
the way he filled his glass and accepted the proffered cigar he was
none of your blue-ribboned, fasting weeds. Indeed, it is not to be
supposed that the comfortable Rector would have tolerated such an one
in his parish. On reflection, I think, perhaps, that I must admit to
being the greater criminal of the two, for he had the merit of being
unconscious.

Later, the Rector and his curate left the dining-room and passed into
the drawing-room, from which there had already proceeded the sounds of
a piano. A nocturne by Chopin came to an abrupt ending as the two men
entered. Tea was then brought in—the taking of tea instead of coffee
after dinner always seems to vouch for the respectability and
antiquity of a family, recalling the traditions of piquet and
spadille. The curate then warbled ‘The Message’ in a by no means
unfinished way. Mr. Gascoyne’s niece played his accompaniments, and
the two older people slept right through half a dozen of his
performances, only awaked by the percussion of a sudden silence.

This was all very entertaining, but was not helping me much, though it
was no doubt convenient to be acquainted with details of life at the
Rectory.

The next morning I again walked over to Lye, and wandered about the
churchyard during the service. This proceeding did not help me more
than my prowl of the previous evening had done.

Through a window I could see the interior of the church, the preacher
in the pulpit, and the glass at his right hand. I was coming to the
conclusion that poisoning the glass would be the only way, and the
idea received an unexpected impetus. Years before, when my great idea
had first taken possession of me, I had provided myself with digitalis
in powder form. Anxious to discover whether its effects remained, and
nervous of seeking the requisite information, I had bought a small dog
from a man in Piccadilly. It was a dog of no particular breed, with a
blue ribbon tied round its neck to suggest how eminently suited it was
to a boudoir existence. I had taken the little thing to Clapham—the
proceeding cost me a pang, for I am very fond of animals, and its eyes
were like Sibella’s—and had experimented, with the result that the
little creature was at this moment lying buried in the back garden. If
I could smear some of the powder on the glass before the Reverend
Henry mounted the pulpit I might accomplish my design.

I returned to town to think it over.

The next week I went down, and put up at a different village, so that
my aimless visits might not attract attention.

I arrived on Saturday, and early on Sunday morning strolled into Lye
Church. It was empty. The October sun shone through the uncoloured
panes, flooding the building with a cheerful light, while here and
there the one or two stained-glass windows threw variegated patches of
colour across the worn stone and worm-eaten pews. I sat down, and
listened intently to make sure whether anyone was about. After a few
minutes of utter silence I went up to the chancel, and glanced
casually towards the vestry. The door was open, and I peeped in. It
was empty, and on the table stood the bottle and glass. In a few
seconds I had sprinkled the glass with fine powder from a small phial.

I regained the churchyard without meeting a soul.

Of course, the plan might very possibly miscarry. The verger might
wash the glass. The Rector might not use it. The curate might preach
and not the Rector. I considered, however, that my luck had been so
good that there might be a special dispensation of fortunate events in
my favour. I met the verger as I passed through the churchyard, a
fussy little man with side whiskers and an abnormal nose, which looked
as if it had been specially designed for being poked into other
people’s business. His air of importance was quite grotesque, and he
was a byword in the village for curiosity. Even as I passed he stopped
a small boy on his way through the churchyard with a covered dish.

“What have you got there, Freddy Barling?”

“Mutton, Mester Voller.”

“With taters?”

“Yus, Mr. Voller.”

Having obtained his information with some degree of tact and suavity
he became stern.

“And for why are yer carryin’ roast mutton through God’s acre, Freddy
Barling?”

At the change of tone Freddy Barling gazed at the belligerent whiskers
in speechless terror, seized with an awful fear that the family roast
mutton and taters were about to be confiscated.

“Go round by the road, Freddy Barling, and don’t blaspheme against
God’s acre with profane food.”

Freddy Barling hurried away, only too thankful at having rescued the
Sunday dinner. The conscientious Mr. Voller pursued his way into the
church, pausing at the door to take a view of the graveyard flooded
with sunlight. He was no doubt reflecting on the pleasant spot in
which he had been permitted to live, and the good seed he had planted
in Freddy Barling’s conscience.

I lingered about the churchyard. Mr. Voller was probably dusting the
litany and the Rector’s Bible, and setting such things as he had not
arranged over night in order. Presently the villagers began to pass
across the churchyard path. There was not much greeting interchanged
beyond a ‘good-morning’ or two. The gossiping came after the service.
I went into the church, and sat down in a secluded corner and waited
for the service to begin. Time went on, and there was no sign of the
Rector or curate. Presently the curate with a very white face emerged
from the vestry, and going up to a stout, comfortable woman in a front
pew spoke to her in a whisper, and they passed out of the west door
into the churchyard.

Suddenly a piercing shriek came through the window. The congregation
sprang to their feet. What on earth was the matter? Old Mr. Crabbs,
the solicitor, after gazing around hesitatingly for a few moments,
hurried out, followed at short intervals by the whole congregation. I
was one of the last, and was in time to see Mrs. Voller being led
through the wicket-gate at the end of the churchyard by the curate and
the Rector.

I quite saw what had happened. Most probably, from the mere instinct
of meddling, Mr. Voller had drunk out of the glass, and had as a
consequence departed on this pleasant Sunday morning for a better
land. By degrees the whole congregation, with many Sabbath-breakers
from the village street corners, were crowded round the vestry door.

“Annie, take your little brother and sister for a walk,” said one
lady, who was evidently bent on seeing as much of the fun as possible
herself.

“What has happened?” I asked of a bystander.

“They do say as Mr. Voller ’ave ’ad a fit and died, and the doctor be
examinin’ ’im now.”

In a few minutes an individual whom I took to be the doctor appeared
at the vestry door.

“Will some of you run and fetch a stretcher and help to carry him
home?”

“’e’s dead, then, doctor?”

“I am afraid so.”

“’ave ’e ’ad a fit?”

“Heart disease, I think,” answered the doctor, gravely.

Full of importance, several young men hastened off for the stretcher,
and in their hurry to oblige became jammed at the wicket-gate.

The whole thing was a very serious annoyance to me, and I walked off
across the fields in a high state of indignation with the departed Mr.
Voller.

That such a nobody should have been allowed to obstruct the workings
of a great policy was irritating. I only hoped that it would be a
lesson to Mr. Voller in his progress through the underworld to be less
inquisitive.

I grew more and more indignant with the shade of that estimable
gentleman as the day went on.

I walked over to Lye again in the evening, when the Rector preached a
sermon on the instability of human hopes. He alluded to the late Mr.
Voller with much feeling. From the gossip in the churchyard after
service I gathered that the doctor had quite made up his mind that
death was due to heart disease.

This was fortunate, but Mr. Voller had spoilt my plans.

I returned to London disconsolate. If there should be the least
suspicion that Mr. Voller had been poisoned things might become very
complicated. Although it was quite improbable that I should be
suspected, it would be too risky to attempt the same procedure again.
It was impossible not to be amused at poor Mr. Voller’s ill fortune.
When the humour of the affair got the better of my irritation I
laughed heartily.

I did not learn the result of the inquest for two or three weeks
afterwards. When I ventured into the neighbourhood again I was
intensely relieved to find that a verdict had been returned in
accordance with my expectations. Mr. Voller was a most respected
character, and the only people who might be expected to bear him a
grudge were the small boys who misbehaved themselves in church.

If it struck anyone to wonder what a half empty glass of water was
doing there they no doubt came to the conclusion that, feeling faint,
Mr. Voller had poured it out to drink.

It was now the Rector’s turn. I began to feel quite annoyed with the
old gentleman. He was giving me a great deal of trouble, whilst if he
had gone off at the right moment I should have been on the best of
terms with his memory. Things were made more difficult by Sibella, who
was a hard mistress to serve, and who took leave to suspect my reasons
for going out of town so constantly. She had had a strange instinct
about me from the moment she had surrendered. She vaguely felt that
something was wrong, although she had not the slightest idea where to
look for it. I was obliged to warn her that jealousy will fatigue
passion sooner or later.

It was late in November before I ventured again into the vicinity of
Lye. Armed with my small phial of digitalis I spent one or two
week-ends in the district without other results than a little more
private information about Mr. Gascoyne’s home life. It was the most
difficult case I had yet attempted. Nothing gave me any assistance.

One day I was chatting with the landlord of the inn when the Reverend
Gascoyne passed the window. It was about half-past four in the
afternoon, and I had presumably come over to the village to fish. As a
matter of fact, my nature is too fastidious for so brutal a sport. I
cannot bear to inflict suffering for mere pleasure, and I am quite
unable to understand the brutality and grossness of a nature that
delights in it.

I had been careful, however, to master its jargon, and there were two
or three shining specimens at the bottom of my basket to give evidence
of my prowess.

“There goes the parson,” I said, carelessly.

“Ah! ’e be going to take tea with old Mrs. Finucane.”

“Indeed?”

“Wet or fine, twice a week, ’e goes over and drinks a cup of tea with
’er, and reads to ’er for an hour or two. ’e be a good man, be the
parson.”

“Who’s old Mrs. Finucane?”

“’Er husband were organist, and when ’e died—though, by the way, ’e
were younger than Mrs. Finucane, and they do say were at college with
the parson—well, when ’e died it were found that Mrs. Finucane were a
pauper, and wur as like as not to ’ave to go to the workus, but the
parson, ’e says to the Squire, ‘If you’ll put down a pound a week for
life, I’ll put down a pound a week for life also,’ and so ’twas done.
Sir Robert couldn’t for shame’s sake refuse, seeing that Mr. Finucane
had saved his son’s life, and so Mrs. Finucane be comfortable enough,
’er cottage being ’er own. They do say that the Squire wur none too
willing to do it, though.”

“Does Mrs. Finucane live in the village?”

I knew it was quite unnecessary to ask exactly where she lived, as
every villager loves to maunder on, and give any inquirer details
concerning his neighbours gratis.

“She lives in the cottage just before you come to the ’ill. You’ll
know it, for it be covered with red berries.”

I went and had a look at Mrs. Finucane’s cottage. It was called ‘The
Glebe,’ and had a mass of creeper with red berries over the front.
Through the bars of the high garden gate I could just see a little
green with the bare flower-beds of winter round it. I inspected the
house from every point of view.

Where the yew-hedge which surrounded the garden was somewhat thin I
could see through and into the pleasant parlour. On this cold autumn
day a bright fire was burning in the grate, and drawn up before it was
a little table with a chess-board, on either side of which sat Mr.
Gascoyne and Mrs. Finucane. By this table was a smaller one with a
cosy-looking tea-urn on a snowy cover, flanked with plates of hot
toast and muffins. It was a homely and pleasant sight to contemplate,
and reminded me of one of those inimitable scenes of village life
which more than one of our lady novelists has depicted with so much
spirit and truth. Strange it is, but such literature as Miss Austin’s
_Emma_ and Mrs. Gaskell’s _Cranford_ has always charmed me more than
any other, on the same principle, I suppose, that a complex character
responds to simplicity. Country folk do not appreciate rural sweets as
does the knowing Cockney.

It seemed impossible that I could gain admission to the house. It was
as secure from any intrusion as if it had been a royal palace guarded
at every gate. From my point of vantage I watched the movements of the
two inside carefully. I was screened from the observation of the
village. In a minute or so they abandoned the attractions of the
chess-table for those of tea and muffins.

The Rector was apparently as capable with tea and muffins as with
partridge and port. In fact, to see him at any meal was to receive an
explanation of his florid complexion and ever-increasing portliness.
He was one of those people—and they are legion—who for the want of a
little vanity abandon themselves completely to the pleasures of the
table. Vanity has its uses, and should by no means be discouraged in
the young. Many a man and woman has been saved from a drunkard’s grave
through the fear of losing a good complexion. In not a few cases
gluttony has met its match in vanity when all other remedies have
failed. Vanity has made cowards appear brave, and the miser
ostentatious. Charity would be an anæmic spinster were it not for her
servant, vanity; and she is as often the parent of moderation as of
excess. With a little proper vanity the kindly Rector might have
preserved a greater measure of youth and sprightliness.

He was nevertheless a pleasant sight as he sat before the blazing fire
and chatted and drank his tea with the old lady. I stood and watched
them through the gap in the hedge till the light faded. Then a little
maid brought in candles, and, drawing the curtains, shut the pleasant
interior from my sight.

I was afraid there was no chance of making Mrs. Finucane’s hospitable
teapot or genial muffins and cake useful to my scheme, for although
such luxuries are poison, it is a slow process.

Occupied with these thoughts, I strolled down the village street. I
could reach the road back to the inn where I was staying more quickly
by passing through the churchyard, and as I reached the church door a
sudden impulse urged me to enter. The gloom was rendered more profound
by the faint suggestion of fading daylight lingering about the
building. I was not at all disturbed by thoughts of Mr. Voller’s
ghost, but made my way without trepidation into the vestry. There
stood the glass of water and the bottle, and I was about to repeat the
experiment which had been so successful in the case of Mr. Voller when
something shining lying on the floor attracted my attention. I went
towards it and picked up a fluted silver cigar-case. I carried it out
of the church, and, opening it, found it full. I went back to my
quarters for the night before I made a thorough examination of my
find. As I had hoped, it proved to be Mr. Gascoyne’s. His monogram was
on the outside. I turned it over and over in deep thought. I
remembered reading, when I was studying poisons in my house in
Clapham, of one used by the Red Indians, who, soaking the end of a
cigar in it, were in the habit of asking an acquaintance who had
offended them to take a friendly weed, with—from their point of
view—very desirable consequences.

I had the strongest objections to using the medium of the glass of
water again. It might strike someone that it had played a part in the
death of the verger.

On arriving in town I consulted the book in which I remembered to have
seen the information as to the Indian poison. It was as I thought; the
end of a cigar dipped in a decoction of the Grobi root was sufficient
to induce stupor ending in death if immediate measures were not taken
to rouse the patient. I knew where to obtain the Grobi root, which is
also used medicinally by the Red Indians.

Down by the docks there is a narrow street full of shops devoted to
the sale of curios from foreign parts. I had gone there during the
days when I was racketing about town to purchase a monkey for a chorus
girl who demanded its immediate production as a pledge of affection.
It was whilst I was in the shop that I had heard the aged proprietor
explaining the properties of a small dried bundle of herbs which hung
from one of the low rafters. At the first mention of the word poison I
had listened intently, whilst apparently interested in the other
articles scattered about the shop.

It was possible that the plant was no longer in its old place. At the
same time it was not the sort of thing which was likely to be largely
in demand, and it might hang there through a generation without being
disturbed. I knew that the proprietor was a great dealer in Chinese
cabinets and curiosities of all kinds. I decided to buy Miss Gascoyne
something very rare, and took my way to the East End in a state of
suspense as to whether the business had been moved. As I entered the
street, however, I saw the cages and bird-stands outside the door as
of yore. So little had changed that it seemed to give me assurance
that the magic root was hanging in the old place. As soon as I entered
the shop I looked anxiously at the place where it had been, and gave
almost a sigh of relief as it caught my eye.

The wizened little old proprietor hastened forward from the back of
the shop where he was inspecting some articles which were being
displayed for his approval by a sailor. The latter, in no way
disconcerted or offended at being left with such scant ceremony, took
up a newspaper which lay on his patron’s desk and settled himself to
read till such time as the proprietor should be free again. I
explained that I wanted a Chinese cabinet; something quite new and
original. The old man looked around puzzled.

“They’re very much of a muchness,” he said, “especially in our days,
when we dealers have got to be as careful as the public that we are
not cheated. There was a sailor as used to do the China trip twice a
year, and he brought back some of the quaintest looking cabinets as
ever I saw, but it turned out that he bought ’em all in this country,
and that’s the way we’re took in.”

It did not strike the old gentleman that if the articles were genuine
it could not matter very much whether they were bought in England or
not.

I objected to everything which was shown to me, and made every effort
to get him to go to his storerooms upstairs, suggesting that he might
have something put away. He denied this, and continued to grope about
amongst his treasures, while the bunches of Grobi root dangled
temptingly above our heads.

While he was meandering I examined them very carefully, and studied
how I could detach one of the bundles in the shortest space of time.
Finally, the old man remembered that he had something which might
tempt me in his back premises, and he went shuffling away to look for
it.

As soon as his back was turned I took my penknife, which I had already
opened in my pocket, and, glancing swiftly at the sailor occupied with
his paper in the corner, reached up my hand and cut the string by
which the bundle of dried root was attached to the ceiling. I thrust
it into my great-coat pocket and looked again at the sailor. He
appeared to have been quite ignorant of my proceeding. It was some
minutes before the old gentleman shambled back into the shop, bearing
in his hands a box of some scented wood, from which, where it had lain
buried in cotton-wool, he lifted out a miniature cabinet of exquisite
workmanship.

“I had forgotten all about this. I’ve had it by me for years.”

I shrewdly suspected that it was one of those things which had been
brought to the old man by someone of whose honesty he was doubtful.

I haggled with him a good deal over the price, but finally took it
away, having paid a very reasonable sum, and having in my great-coat
pocket the Grobi root.

It was a drawback that it was impossible to test the efficacy of the
poison taken in the particular way in which I intended.

I made my decoction, and, steeping the end of one of the cigars in it,
dried it and returned it with the others to the case. I then went to
the village of Lye, and, entering the church one evening, stole into
the vestry. Unperceived, I placed the cigar-case on the table behind a
pile of books.

I had well considered the disadvantage of my scheme, which was that
the Reverend gentleman might hand his cigar-case to some friend, who
would have first choice, and might select the prize. It would not have
done to place two poisoned cigars in the case, as the fact of two
gentlemen lighting up and swooning away could not fail to attract
attention and rouse suspicion.

It was with a sigh of satisfaction and relief that I opened _The
Times_ one morning and read in the obituary notices that the Reverend
Henry Gascoyne, Rural Dean, and Rector of Lye, had succumbed to an
apoplectic stroke.



Chapter XX

The rest of the winter I was able to devote myself to Sibella, who
grew more beautiful in my eyes every day. She was bewitchingly
decadent, and her decadence was independent of extraneous aids to
beauty. I was careful not to be seen too frequently with her in
public, and permitted Sir Anthony Cross to do all the drudgery. Lionel
was quite unsuspecting, and inasmuch as I never omitted an opportunity
of obliging him I verily believe that the poor fool believed me to be
attached to him.

I well remember how one evening, when Grahame was present, Lionel
became quite sentimental over our school days, and talked as if we had
all three been the greatest of chums. A smile played round Grahame’s
dignified mouth as his brother-in-law meandered on about “those dear
old days.”

“Do you remember when I was training for the mile, and had that
accident?” Lionel asked.

We both of us nodded.

“That was a very mysterious affair,” he went on. “I could have sworn
as I went down that I tripped over something which struck me across
the leg.”

“Imagination,” suggested Grahame.

“I don’t know, but it has always seemed to me most mysterious.”

“I don’t think it’s possible to account for sensations at such a
moment as that,” I said, indifferently.

Lionel went on with his reminiscences. He recalled the first day he
had ever been to the Hallwards’, which, considering that he must have
remembered how badly he and Sibella behaved to me on that day, was not
a brilliant exhibition of tact. At last he concluded:

“And now Sibella and I are married, and we are all jolly together.”

Coming from anyone else the remark might have sounded jovial; coming
from Lionel it sounded foolish.

“Yes,” I said drily, “we are all jolly together.”

For one moment Grahame looked at me curiously, but shrewdly suspecting
that my liking for Lionel had not grown much with years, put down the
emphasis in my voice to that fact.

I was angry with myself for having made such a slip.

Lionel was soon in the throes of an election struggle, a sudden death
having removed a well-known party hack to a greater majority than it
had ever been his lot to be numbered with on earth.

As much to his own astonishment as to that of the wire-pullers of his
party Lionel was elected. It was a political surprise, for the seat
was hardly likely to have been wasted on a nonentity had a victory
been probable. Lionel took all credit to himself, and the cheers of
approval as he was introduced to the House made him quite delirious
with vanity. His old father, who was dying by inches, was so delighted
that he immediately handed to his son a large slice of the wealth for
which he was greedily waiting. The infatuated young man was somewhat
sobered by the reception of his maiden speech, which was such as not
even the most self-satisfied of beings could have assured himself was
flattering. Sibella somewhat annoyed me. She was for the time quite
impressed by her husband’s meretricious triumph. I believe she thought
that she had underestimated him, and that he really was a person of
great intellectual attainments. She began to talk to me of conscience,
of remembering her duty, and indulged in all the usual female
preliminaries to a retreat; but long before she was ready to make an
effort, and show me the door, I had managed to demonstrate to her that
her husband had gone as far as he was likely to go. In fact, Lionel
himself was incapable of playing a serious part for long, and
associated himself with the heir to a dukedom whose election to the
House of Commons had been an insult, and who was prepared to hobnob
with a stable-boy in default of the society from which he had become
somewhat of an outcast. His friends had hoped that a political career
might whitewash him, and were now only too anxious for him to lose his
seat before some irretrievable scandal occurred. Lionel was quite
content with his friend’s exalted position, and imagined that he was
the companion of the very cream of the popular House, a delusion in
which I encouraged him on every possible occasion.

Familiarity with political life likewise disillusioned Sibella, and
she was too acute not to learn very speedily that to be the wife of a
Member of Parliament need not necessarily carry with it social
advantages of any kind.

I fancy Lord Gascoyne had been a little surprised at Miss Gascoyne
engaging herself to me, for to his aristocratic prejudices a Jew was a
Jew, however charming he might be. He was perfectly prepared to be
quite civil to the race, and would have denied it nothing but an
entrance into the blood circle. I was, however, indirectly a member of
his family, and when it dawned upon him that should he and his heir
die I was, after Mr. Gascoyne, the heir, he was compelled to change
his attitude. I think he determined, if possible, to bar me out by a
family of stalwart sons and daughters. Luckily, so far, Lady Gascoyne
showed no signs of increasing the obstacles in my path.

I spent the remainder of the winter thinking out the completion of my
design. Of course, the Earl would have to go first. It would leave me
several years to deal with his heir, and in the vicissitudes of a
boy’s life there must be innumerable occasions when death may
accidentally step in and claim him.

There was at this time a talk of sending Lord Gascoyne to a large
dependency as Governor. The rumour threw me into a state of the
greatest anxiety. If he betook himself and his family to the other end
of the world he might have half a dozen children round him before I
could interfere.

Luckily the project fell through for the time being, but his abilities
and personal dignity marked him out as a man to whom the offer was
certain to be made again.

Lionel Holland had a great ambition to know Lord and Lady Gascoyne.
Lord Gascoyne, at all events, was born a freeman of that inner ring
which, for all his fine acquaintances, had so far held Lionel at bay.
Some of them had been civil to Sibella, for she, like Grahame, had a
natural distinction which people were impelled to admit. When,
however, it became a question of accepting Lionel also—and he was by
no means the person to stand aloof—they drew off. His vanity refused
to admit that he had been snubbed, but inwardly he was conscious that
there was something wrong.

He had therefore fixed on the Gascoynes as people who would be able to
secure him an introduction to the highest circle of the social heaven.
It was in vain that I assured him quite frankly that I was not on
terms of intimacy with them or any of their friends, that, so far, I
was not married to Miss Gascoyne, and that my Jewish blood made me
more or less of an outsider in the family. He looked upon this as
affectation.

“Why, you might be Lord Gascoyne! You’re as good as any of them.”

“I shall be when I am Lord Gascoyne, but so far I am only plain Israel
Rank. No, I won’t call myself plain, for that would indeed be
affectation.”

“You’ve been to their house.”

“Once or twice.”

“You’ve dined there.”

“Once only.”

“People of that kind don’t ask a man to dinner unless they look upon
him as one of themselves.”

“Except for political motives,” I murmured.

He was too dense to see the point, and persisted.

“An acquaintance like that wants nursing,” he said patronisingly, much
as an old hand might have done to a young man just starting in
business.

As a matter of fact, he was exactly suggesting what I was doing, but
my methods were superior to his, and I should never have thought of
describing them with such a lack of taste. His inability to see this
was the secret of his non-success with the particular class he was
anxious to cultivate.

I heard from Miss Gascoyne constantly, and my letters in reply to her
high-souled, dignified, yet tender epistles were masterpieces in
diplomacy—an unkind critic might have said in hypocrisy.

I cannot help wondering as I sit here writing these memoirs what her
feelings are at the present moment. I am afraid that she is one of
those extraordinary characters who literally cannot love where they do
not respect. She will have the pleasure, however, of glancing over her
letters written to me at this time, for I have left her the task of
examining my papers and destroying such as I thought fit to keep.
Sibella’s letters I always destroyed. This is an act of justice to any
woman with whom one is conducting an intrigue which should not be
neglected. Not that Sibella had written many letters. As I have
pointed out, there was a curious vein of caution in the Hallward
family. In fact, much as I know she must be suffering, she has not
made the least sign since the law took charge of my affairs. I believe
that she still has faith that I shall extricate myself somehow. Poor
child! Jack Sheppard himself could not do much inside the condemned
cell of a modern prison. I have given the matter of escape thought,
but considering how easy it is to cage a human being, it is somewhat
surprising that there should ever have been an age in which the escape
of criminals was comparatively frequent. I have also wondered whether,
if a murderer were to display signs of madness between conviction and
execution, the law would carry out the penalty. It might be worth the
while of a smaller criminal to make the attempt. In my case I cannot
help thinking it would be somewhat undignified to linger in the public
mind as an individual who was mouthing through the remainder of his
existence with straws in his hair. Besides, it would be a satisfaction
for the public—who have been made uncomfortable by such wholesale
murdering—to be able to say, “Poor creature! he was mad.” On the
whole, I would sooner live as the wicked Lord Gascoyne than with a
reputation for insanity. Moreover, my simulation might not be
effective, and if a report got abroad that I had made myself
ridiculous by feigning madness it would be intolerable.



Chapter XXI

Lionel Holland was, of course, mistaken in accepting as genuine my
indifference as to whether the Gascoynes were civil to me or no. Since
they had asked me to their house it was necessary I should become as
intimate as possible, and Lionel could not know how I had schemed and
intrigued to make myself acceptable in their sight. I had nibbled all
round their circle, so to speak, unobtrusively attempting to identify
myself as much as possible with the people they knew. This was a
matter of no little difficulty. I was compelled to make it known how
near I stood to the succession. This gave me a certain sort of
position, and at least tolerance, as more or less one of themselves by
the exclusive set in which the Gascoynes moved. They still, however,
showed no sign of great friendliness. Of course, the important person
to conciliate was Lady Gascoyne. She did not belong to the difficult
set by birth, and was naturally nervous of doing anything which might
show her as a novice in the art of social selection. Not that she was
in any way a snob; indeed, far from it.

She evidently liked me. I was the sort of personality that the heiress
of enterprising American ancestors—the wrong word; her forbears could
hardly be described as ancestors—would like. I had, however, so far
not interested Lord Gascoyne, whose sympathies were limited. He had
asked me to the house in a purely formal way, and as a member of the
family who had a right to be so asked.

So far I had, as it were, been conducting reconnaissances round the
network of his character and temperament in order to discover his
vulnerable point. It was extremely difficult. He was one of those
self-contained Englishmen whose sense of duty comes somewhat as a
surprise in conjunction with an apparently unenthusiastic temperament.
The very person to be a royal substitute in a dependency. Enthusiasm
is the greatest curse that can befall a reigning Sovereign, and a
really sincere, enthusiastic monarch is distrusted by no one so much
as by his own subjects. In his presence I at once suppressed the
artistic side of my character, and pretended to a reserve and coldness
in no way natural to me. Such topics as were discussed I treated with
as much pure reason as was consistent with a respect to aristocratic
prejudices, an attitude eminently conciliatory to the English noble,
who is never so happy as when he flatters himself that he is
displaying liberal tendencies. There did not, however, appear to be
any likelihood of my being asked to Hammerton, and even my confession
that I had visited the place as a tourist failed to elicit the desired
invitation. He was, because of his limitations, the most difficult
person I had yet had to deal with. At the same time, my being on
visiting terms with Lord and Lady Gascoyne, and admitted by them to be
a relative, gave me a social status which I had not before possessed.

It was highly necessary to be swift with his lordship. I must say that
I had less compunction about removing him than I had had about any of
the others. He was so entirely impersonal in his relations with the
outer world.

I think his wife was in love with him. He was the sort of man women
love desperately where they love at all; for the simple reason that
they are never permitted to become really familiar. They are always in
the presence of their reigning sovereign. A very wholesome thing for
most women, and especially corrective for an American woman. It had
been, I fancy, a great change for her, inasmuch as before marriage she
had ruled her father absolutely. It was a little surprising that Lord
Gascoyne should have condescended to mingle his blood with what was,
after all, quite a plebeian strain. It was the more surprising as he
was in no need of money, and I discovered afterwards that at his
request her enormous dowry was settled absolutely on her children. I
wondered very much if the dowry would revert to the American relations
should she die childless; also if, in the case of Lord Hammerton
outliving his parents, but dying a minor, the money would pass to the
Gascoyne family. It would certainly be amusing were I to inherit the
American dollars.

The great thing, however, was to secure an invitation to Hammerton. If
I could only render Lord Gascoyne some service, or place him under an
obligation to me in any way, it would probably follow as a matter of
course.

An idea struck me. There was the portrait of Lord George, the one
thing saved from the wreck of my uncle’s home. I knew that Lord
Gascoyne took the greatest pride and interest in the portrait gallery
at Hammerton, and that there was no portrait of Lord George Gascoyne,
my own immediate ancestor, among the family pictures.

Finally, seeing no way of approaching the matter as if by chance, I
wrote and offered him the portrait for the collection at Hammerton,
and he replied asking me to come and see him.

I went, and was shown into his private sanctum. He was, considering
his temperament, quite profuse in his thanks, but would at first not
hear of accepting the portrait as a gift.

“As you say, it is not by a great name,” he said; “but at the same
time it is a very good name, and is worth money, and more than money,
to me.”

I gave him to understand that if he declined it as a gift it would
hurt my feelings, as I should conclude that he did not care about
accepting anything at my hands. This I conveyed to him in as tactful a
way as possible. He saw, however, what I meant, and graciously
accepted the picture.

“You must come down and see it hung.”

He could not very well say less, but by the expression of his face I
wondered whether a vague suspicion of my motive had not, even as he
spoke, entered his mind.

However, the invitation was given, and I intended to avail myself of
it. I had no intention of allowing the matter to slip his memory.

“It must be a week-end,” I said smiling, “for, you know, I work hard
all the week.”

“Lady Gascoyne shall write and ask you. She is at Hammerton herself at
present.”

It was quite unnecessary for his lordship to inform me of Lady
Gascoyne’s whereabouts, for I followed the movements of his household
as closely as he did himself.

At Christmas I paid a flying visit to the Gascoynes in the South of
France, and was welcomed with a curious quietness of passion by Miss
Gascoyne, and like a son by her aunt and uncle.

Miss Gascoyne always exalted me, mentally if not morally, and even in
the latter direction she led me out of the limitations I had laid down
for myself, and beyond which it would be dangerous for me to venture.
I am quite capable of great moral enthusiasm, and it has always been
my habit to keep out of the way of those likely to infect me with
strenuousness.

She talked of ideals quite simply and earnestly, and without the least
suggestion of cant, and I was obliged to find some aspirations
suitable to these occasions. Being a woman in love she was content to
warm her romance at a very small fire, and, further, to imagine it a
very big blaze.

I was terribly afraid of being found out by her in any way. I knew
that once we were married she would die rather than admit that she had
made a mistake. Her loyalty would amount to fanaticism, but she was a
woman who could take strong measures before the irrevocable was
accomplished. Her attitude has been that of a medieval saint matched
with a Cenci. She has held her peace, and she has professed to believe
what she knew to be false; whilst at the same time she has suffered
agonies of abasement.

Nearly all women, however, are deceived in love. It is their pastime.
Some never discover the fact, and dream their lives away from their
marriage-day to the grave. If Miss Gascoyne hardly possessed the
phlegmatic instinct which would enable her to join the comfortable
ranks of the latter, she was none the less dwelling in a fool’s
paradise during those winter days on the Riviera. Those who considered
her cold would have been astonished had they known all. She was a
concealed volcano.

I returned to town a little exhausted by the rarified atmosphere of
reverential romance in which I had been living, and looking forward
with a sense of relief to the decadent fascination of Sibella.

Miss Gascoyne with her Utopian dreams about the life of usefulness we
were to lead required the natural antidote, and, strangely enough, the
first whiff of the perfume Sibella used, wafted to me across the room
as she rose to greet me, banished all sensation of ever having been
bored by Edith, for I never admired her so much as when I was in the
company of Sibella. In the same way I never longed for Sibella to such
an extent as when I was with Edith.

Amongst the letters which I found waiting when I reached my rooms
there was an invitation from Lady Gascoyne asking me to give them the
following Saturday to Monday at Hammerton.

From the tone of her letter it was obvious that she had been only too
anxious to second her husband’s invitation. To do her justice, she had
no class prejudices, and such exclusiveness as she displayed arose
from her desire that her husband should think her in every way fitted
to her position.

In my daily letter to Miss Gascoyne I mentioned casually that I had
been invited to Hammerton. I knew that there were few things which
would please her so much.

It was a bitterly cold evening in January when I reached Hammerton
station, and it was snowing fast when we drove across the stone bridge
which spanned the old moat and turned in at the gates.

There was just time to dress for dinner, and, getting into my evening
clothes as quickly as possible, I descended and found that the only
member of the party who had made his appearance was a young American
millionaire who was being introduced to English society. I thought him
particularly stupid and offensive, and was glad when Lord Gascoyne and
the other guests quickly followed and we went to dinner.

We dined in a long, narrow room with a vaulted ceiling and gray
antique stone walls covered with tapestry. The mixture of a feudal
past with modern luxury was exceedingly grateful to a fastidious
taste. The servants came and went through a low arched door, which
must have been built during the early days of the Norman Conquest. The
walls were covered with antique implements of battle, whilst imposing
suits of armour loomed out of the shadows, their polished surfaces
reflecting here and there the blaze from the enormous log-fire in the
vast chimney-place. The party consisted of about half a dozen people
besides myself. There was the young millionaire I have already
mentioned, and who, I believe, was destined by Lady Gascoyne for Lady
Enid Branksome, a pretty, fair-haired girl, who was staying at
Hammerton with her mother. It is surprising, when one comes to think
of it, how few young Americans marry English noblewomen. It would be
interesting to inquire whether this reticence is caused by a
disinclination to live in America—where, of course, precedence and
rank would have to be dropped—or whether the American young man does
not care to buy anything in the shape of a title which is not
hereditary. It would certainly be incongruous for Lady Enid Branksome
to degenerate into plain Mrs. Puttock of Philadelphia. It would seem
almost a murder. The Branksomes, however, were poor, and Mr. Puttock
was a multi-millionaire. He was obviously much taken with Lady Enid,
who, on her side, was evidently torn by the convicting claims of love
and interest; for young Sir Cheveley Drummond was also of the party.
This had been a great tactical error on Lady Gascoyne’s part, for he
seemed to find greater favour in Lady Enid’s eyes than did the fat,
unhealthy cheeks and vacuous expression of Mr. Puttock of
Philadelphia. At the same time, a glance at Lady Branksome’s face
impressed one with the idea that the Lady Enid would most probably be
made to do what she was told.

I have nearly always found house parties somewhat dull, unless there
happened to be present a personality of new and surprising interest,
and personalities do not frequent country-houses. But for the work I
was engaged on I might have found the Saturday till Monday at
Hammerton as dull as anything of the kind. It was, however, of
absorbing interest to me to be in the house with two people whom I had
decided on removing. The position pleased me. This absolutely modern
company in a medieval castle, and with a medieval criminal in their
midst, was truly interesting. Lady Branksome was evidently doubtful
about me, but noting the Semitic cast of my features, and hearing that
I was on the Stock Exchange, concluded that there could only be one
reason for my being in such company, and that must be enormous wealth.
Having several other daughters just ready to burst from the schoolroom
into the ranks of the marriageable, she was tentatively affable. She
was the sort of woman I always found it very easy to get on with; of
the world, cynical and good-natured, very strong-minded, and willing
to live and let live. She was at the same time most intolerant of
people making fools of themselves, and had no intention of allowing
those who were dependent on her to do so if she could help it.
Providing she was assured that I had no intentions, she would be
perfectly friendly, even when she discovered that I was comparatively
poor. Indeed, I gathered in the course of a conversation with her,
that she had quite a weakness for adventurous young men. Probably it
was because she understood them so well that she was such an expert in
keeping them at a distance. During dinner, however, and pending
inquiries which would no doubt be conducted when the ladies were
alone, she treated me as a person rich enough to be conciliated. A
very different woman was Lady Briardale. However rich a man might be,
he was nothing to her unless he could show a pedigree. She evidently
thought very little of Mr. Puttock, and less of Mr. Rank, who looked a
Jew. She probably regarded it as a slight that she should have been
asked to meet two such absolute nobodies. She had never heard of
anybody called Puttock, or Rank. They were not names at all. They were
merely ciphers by which the lower classes were differentiated one from
the other. She would probably have thought it more convenient if the
lower classes had been known by numbers like cabs and convicts; and,
after all, they were not so interesting as convicts, and not so useful
as cabs in her eyes. She was evidently somewhat annoyed that I should
talk so well, a fact she might have forgiven if others had not paid me
the compliment of listening. Indeed, she became quite civil to
Puttock, who, she perhaps felt, showed himself conscious of his
inferiority by holding his tongue.

Sir Cheveley Drummond, whom I knew to be entertaining, but who was
quite taken up with Lady Enid, completed the party, which did not
promise much amusement.

After dinner we all sat in the picture-gallery. The last time I had
seen it was in company with the gang of excursionists, and I
laughingly recalled the fact to Lady Gascoyne when she was showing me
where the picture of Lord George had been hung. Lady Briardale was
apparently a little astonished when she heard that Lord George was my
ancestor, and that I had presented the picture to the collection. Lady
Branksome had evidently recalled my name.

“I have been wondering, Mr. Rank, where I have heard of you, and I
remember now that it was from my youngest boy. He met you at supper
one evening. I didn’t ask where,” she said parenthetically, “but he
talked of nobody else for days.”

I remembered young Gavan Branksome, a nice, fair-haired youth, who had
attracted my notice by being somewhat like Grahame Hallward.

“I have not seen him since.”

“No; he is in India. Did you like India, Sir Cheveley?” she said
quickly, stopping the love-sick warrior as he was making his way
across the room to Lady Enid.

Poor Sir Cheveley was forced to pause, and whilst Lady Branksome
detained him, Mr. Puttock sank into the seat which Lady Enid had left
vacant for Sir Cheveley.

“Charming man, Sir Cheveley,” said Lady Branksome, with almost a laugh
when he finally moved away. “I’ve known him all his life, and he was
always attractive, even when he was sixteen.”

I am sure she was perfectly honest in saying that she liked Sir
Cheveley. She probably liked him as much as, in her heart, she
disliked Mr. Puttock.

Poor Sir Cheveley’s disappointment, however, did not prevent his being
excellent company in the smoking-room.

I sat up in my own room thinking matters over till a late hour. Before
I arrived at Hammerton I had had vague ideas of pushing Lord Gascoyne
down a disused well, or something of that kind, in which an old feudal
castle like Hammerton might be supposed to abound. On consideration,
however, I came to the conclusion that Lord Gascoyne would be a very
difficult person to push anywhere he did not mean to go.

I was naturally afraid of poison in such a case. It would only be
possible to use it whilst I was in the house, and that was dangerous.
My growing proximity to the succession was bringing me nearer and
nearer to the perilous land of motive. Violence, unless I were given
an extraordinarily good opportunity, was out of the question. The
cigar would not do, either, for, strange to say, Lord Gascoyne hardly
smoked at all. Cigars and pipes he never attempted, and I noticed that
as a rule he merely lit a cigarette in order to keep his guests in
countenance.

I had heard of people being made away with when out shooting, but in
my case it would hardly be possible. In the first place, I did not
shoot, having always had a disinclination to the brutal killing of
animals for the sake of pleasure. There remained as far as I could see
only the ordinary means of poisoning, with all their attendant
dangers.

An instantaneous poison would be most convenient, as it was highly
unlikely that I should have sufficient access to Lord Gascoyne to deal
with him slowly.

I rose in the morning with one scheme after another chasing itself
through my brain. Dressing rapidly, I went for a walk before breakfast
round the ancient battlements. These were quite a mile in
circumference, and the climbing of worn steps, hazardous scalings of
the walls from whence to get a better view, and a careful examination
of the various architectural designs of which the building was
constructed, occupied me very pleasantly for a full hour, and it was
half-past nine, the time for breakfast, when I turned to re-enter the
castle. As I descended some steps which led down to the quadrangle, I
was astonished to come face to face with a girl of about nineteen or
twenty and a child. She was obviously a lady, but she had not been at
the dinner-table the evening before, or in the picture-gallery
afterwards. I concluded that she was the little boy’s governess, but
who the child might be I could not imagine. I detected at once that
the girl was beautiful, and when I say I detected I use the word
advisedly, because it was not a beauty which would be immediately
appreciated. The gray eyes, oval face, threaded gold hair, straight
nose, and delicately-cut mouth were almost too frail to impress the
casual observer. I saw at once, however, that she was rarely perfect
in such a type of beauty as I always imagined Burns’ Mary must have
possessed. She wore a quaint hood, almost like a child’s, edged with
some inexpensive gray fur. The little boy looked at me shyly, and I
held out my arms. A smile broke over his face and he offered me his
ball, inviting me to play with him. In less than a minute we were all
three laughing like old friends.

After having made myself sufficiently agreeable, I escaped from the
child, who was clamouring to me to continue the game, and ran down the
steps. I found Lady Gascoyne in sole possession of the breakfast-table.
“I am afraid we are the only early risers, Mr. Rank,” she said.

As a matter of fact, I rather fancied I had caught a glimpse of Lady
Enid going along the road towards Hammerton woods, and I think I was
fairly correct in guessing that she was not walking at such a rapid
pace for the pleasure of her own company. Indeed, I would not have
minded taking long odds that Sir Cheveley was not very far away.

I, of course, said nothing of this to Lady Gascoyne, but mentioned my
meeting with the girl in the gray hood.

Lady Gascoyne smiled.

“Now, isn’t she pretty, Mr. Rank?”

“Almost beautiful,” I hazarded. It is dangerous to be enthusiastic
about another woman, even to the nicest of her sex.

“That shows your good taste. Some people cannot see it.”

“It is the sort of beauty which is very rare, and not exactly showy.”

“She is to my mind wonderful. It does one good to look at her. I
expect you are wondering who the little boy is. It is a sad story. I
had a great school friend whose father was enormously rich. About a
year after her marriage he failed, and her husband’s fortune went in
the same crash. Her husband shot himself, and she died six months
later, leaving her little boy in my care. Oh!” she added quickly,
evidently afraid that my inward comment might be a disparagement on
her dead friend, “she did so at my express desire. We loved one
another so, that it was the most natural thing she could do.”

“He seems a dear little chap.”

“He is a darling, and devoted to Hammerton already. Lord Gascoyne is
so good about it, and lets me have him here always. Miss Lane is his
governess.”

Sir Cheveley Drummond, looking a little conscious, came in at this
moment.

“How energetic everybody is this morning,” said Lady Gascoyne.

Mr. Puttock, who appeared on the scene almost as she spoke, looked
anything but energetic. He looked as effete as only a decadent young
American can look. Lady Enid, who followed, managed to convey with
great art the impression that she had just left her room. Lady
Briardale did not appear, but Lady Branksome, unable to trust Lady
Enid, arrived in good time, although she confided to me later that she
thought breakfasting in public a barbarous practice.

After breakfast, the whole party, with the exception of Sir Cheveley
Drummond, went to church. Poor Sir Cheveley hardly saw the point of
going when he knew perfectly well that he would not be permitted to
share Lady Enid’s hymn-book.

I distinctly heard Lady Briardale say, as we were all waiting in the
hall:

“I should have thought, my dear, that he would have preferred a
synagogue.”

At church a thrill passed through me when I found that I was seated
next to Esther Lane. It was an infinite pleasure to me to be sitting
beside her through the long and stupid sermon. The yellow winter
sunlight fell across the recumbent effigies of dead and gone
Gascoynes, and made the painted window to the east a blaze of colour.

Her presence and the surroundings filled me with a sense of purity and
peace, and I surrendered myself to the primitive emotions. I suppose a
less subtle soul would have been oppressed with a sense of past sins,
and would in such a building have been filled with despair at the
consciousness of irrevocable guilt. I fortunately had schooled myself
to control. The sensation of goodness can, like other things, be
acquired. When I had obtained the prize for which I was striving I had
not the least doubt that I should find it easy to put away from me any
unworthy feeling of regret. Why should I not? The harm was after all
very questionable. It was not as if, so far, I had made widows and
orphans. The amount of suffering I had inflicted was limited, and at
any rate I should not leave poverty, the greatest of all ills, in my
track. Indeed, under the influence of that Sunday morning service I
felt quite regenerated. When we left the church Esther Lane and her
pupil went through the great gates of the castle into the woods
beyond, and I would have given worlds to follow her, but Lady
Branksome told me that she agreed with her son, and that I was
decidedly amusing. She insisted on my going for a walk with her. At
the same time she took good care to see that Mr. Puttock and Lady Enid
were close behind.

In the afternoon I manœuvred a meeting with Esther Lane. I surmised
that she and her pupil would walk away from the castle, and so I kept
watch on the drawbridge. Everybody was more or less occupied. I was
aware that Lady Branksome had, before retiring for her afternoon nap,
left Mr. Puttock in possession of Lady Enid, who had got rid of him
with all the ease imaginable, and was now walking with Sir Cheveley on
the battlements.

Lord Gascoyne had pleaded letters, and I had arranged to fetch him in
an hour or so and go for a tramp.

As Esther Lane and her pupil crossed the drawbridge I was leaning over
the extreme end of the parapet in the most natural manner in the
world. I pretended not to notice them, and only permitted myself to be
aroused from a contemplation of the beautiful scenery which lay below
by the child flinging his arms with a scream of delight round my legs.

She blushed as she apologised for her charge. She was evidently a
little nervous as to what her employers might think if they saw her
walking with one of their guests, and, after a short interchange of
commonplaces, tried to get rid of me. I refused to be shaken off, and
a couple of hundred yards took us out of sight of the castle.

We dropped at once into a style of conversation which was almost
intimate, and although I was with her barely three quarters of an hour
she confided a great deal in me.

Not that there was much to confide. She was the daughter of a
solicitor who had left nothing but debts. Her mother was dead, and she
was absolutely alone in the world. Her only relations were some very
distant cousins who were so poor that it had been impossible for them
to help her in any way.

“I was very lucky,” she said, gratefully, “to get such a good
situation, and it came about in the quaintest way. Lady Gascoyne had
seen all sorts of people with diplomas and recommendations which I had
not got, and she saw me sitting in the waiting-room as she passed out.
I don’t think the agent quite liked her engaging me, but Lady Gascoyne
insisted that I was just the person she wanted, and here I am.”

She smiled contentedly. She evidently considered herself an extremely
fortunate young woman.

She attracted me enormously without in any way usurping the place of
the two women who already counted for so much in my life.

All too soon I was obliged to leave her and hurry back to Lord
Gascoyne, whom I found waiting for me.

It was the first opportunity I had had of really impressing him, and I
did not waste my time. I took such an absorbing interest in everything
about me that I fancy he was surprised to find himself talking so much
and so intimately.

I was perfectly ready to enter into the subjects which interested him
most. He was evidently deeply imbued with a belief in the divine right
of aristocracy, and with no superficial sense of its responsibilities.
He was above all things a serious man, with little sense of humour. I
imagined that Lady Gascoyne must find him dull, but his qualities were
essentially those which command women’s respect and hold them with a
certain kind of fear.

As is the case with his class—a class which the popular organs are
fond of describing as irresponsible and brainless—his knowledge and
grasp of life were very extensive. His individual sympathies may not
have been very great, but he had a general sense of justice which
marked him out as an administrator, from many who were perhaps much
his intellectual superiors. What he knew was of use to him.

I was surprised at my own capacity for conciliating him. I accompanied
him with ease into the region of politics. He was evidently impressed,
and it was satisfactory to feel him gradually treating me with less
and less formality.

“Your race gave us one of our greatest statesmen,” he said, “for I do
not believe that anyone has understood real statesmanship better than
Disraeli.”

“Some people seem to think he was insincere,” I replied, “but I don’t
believe it. His cynicism was simply the complement of a mind with a
singularly large outlook.”

So subtle an appreciation impressed the man whose own nature was all
in a straight line. The curves of a less direct character appealed to
him as insight.

In listening to him, however, I could not help reflecting that his
kind, whatever the moralist may pretend, is far more vulgar than the
abnormal. The orchid is the most fascinating of flowers in all its
varieties, but it is rare; or do we only call that type normal which
prevails for the moment? Which is the more moral man—he who by reason
of a lack of imagination ranges himself as the mercenary of tradition
and convention, or he who rebels and finds himself wounded and struck
at wherever he turns? Not that I can claim to be a martyr to moral
restlessness, although at one time I sincerely believe I had in me the
makings of a reformer. Nevertheless, there is always something a
little vulgar about the man who ranges himself definitely on one side.

We returned to the castle on very good terms indeed. The rest of the
party were at tea in the long picture-gallery. I like, even at this
unpleasant crisis, to linger over the memory of the picture-gallery at
Hammerton on that Sunday afternoon in midwinter. The long, straight
windows through which the frosty sunset flushed the gilded frames and
old tapestries, the firelight playing on the silver of the tea-table
drawn up before Lady Gascoyne—for there were no servants to desecrate
the most convivial of all meals—made up a delightful picture, whilst
the child Walter Chard, in his sailor clothes, ran from one group to
the other as happy and unconscious as if he had a prescriptive right
to the enchantment of the castle.

I was delighted on our assembling for dinner to find that Esther Lane
was of the party. She was dressed simply in gray, with a couple of
blush roses at her bosom. Lady Enid was talking to her when I came in.

It fell to my lot to take her in to dinner, and we thoroughly enjoyed
ourselves. She was quite unconscious amongst these great folk, and
unaffectedly joyous. I almost fancied that Lady Gascoyne looked at me
once or twice with the faintest sign of surprise. I sincerely hoped
she would not inform Miss Lane of the fact that I was engaged,
although it was more than probable. Esther Lane was one of those women
who are, to a certain extent, lacking in the natural defences of their
sex as a result of their own honesty and simplicity. That she was
prepared to be interested in me was obvious, and I made the most of my
time. After dinner she played to us. It was not a brilliant
performance, but she was accurate and had feeling, and she touched the
keys wooingly and caressingly, making the piano sing, a gift rare even
among some so-called finished performers. If people cannot make
instruments sing they had better leave them alone. Afterwards I played
and sang, and she declared herself ashamed of her own performance.
Music had the advantage of giving us an excuse for remaining at the
piano together, and later, when everybody else settled down to cards
some way off, we were left trying over one song after the other. When
I murmured that it seemed as if we had known each other all our lives
she blushed.

Later, in the smoking-room, Sir Cheveley said he was quite astonished
to find how pretty she was. It was a fact which he declared had grown
on him gradually.

The next morning I returned to town, but I had made such good use of
my time that I carried with me an invitation to return in a fortnight,
and it was Lord Gascoyne who brought it me from his wife.

He had made quite a friend of me. It was not probable that he had ever
had a friend with anything of the bizarre about him before.



Chapter XXII

The time passed slowly, but in a fortnight I found myself again at
Hammerton sleeping beneath the same roof as Esther Lane. I met her
again on the terrace on Sunday morning, as I had expected. I could
quite follow the workings of her mind. Because she was possessed of
great self-respect, she had determined not to be on the terrace that
morning, but because she was very much in love she was there after
all. Before many moments had passed I saw that she was aware of my
engagement. There was a look of suffering in her eyes as she turned
them on me. She had the most wonderful way of suddenly subjecting the
person to whom she was speaking to their full glance. If she could
suffer because I was engaged to another woman, she had enough
sentimental interest in me to excuse my going far. She was the
character to appreciate the simulation of agony born of a struggle
between duty and affection, and I was ready to ring up the curtain on
the comedy. She was fully conscious that I loved her. Yes, I loved her
quite passionately, and yet it was not altogether passion. It is one
of the presumptuous platitudes of conventional moralists to describe a
man’s love when it ceases to be concentrated on one individual as lust
and base passion. Side by side with this contention they will declare
that the highest morality is to love your neighbour as yourself, so
little are they given to their own boasted virtue of consistency.

I talked to her for some time about the most ordinary matters, but I
could see that she was trembling.

“I have thought of you a good deal,” I ventured.

She ignored the question, but without a show of indifference.

“I think Walter and I ought to go in.” She moved away a little
awkwardly.

“I suppose I ought to go in too.” I went to breakfast, leaving the
impression I had intended.

In the afternoon I saw her again, and before I was quite aware of it,
I had told her I loved her beyond all women in the world, and having
done so was compelled to anticipate the scene which I had been
mentally preparing.

I assured her passionately that I was not the fickle person I might
seem to be, that directly I saw her I knew that I had made a mistake,
and that I could never be happy with anyone but her.

She was too much in love to do more than make a pretence of forbidding
me to speak on the subject.

She walked straight into the carefully-hidden trap, and found herself
being made love to without the question of my engagement being
discussed, and once she had thrown down the barriers of reserve, with
the enemy actually in her camp, it was impossible to replace them. She
accused herself vehemently, however, of being unworthy of her trust.
She would resign her position. She could never, she asserted, remain,
and be guilty of duplicity. I beat down her poor little attempts at
self-defence at once. If she threw up such a position I should never
forgive myself. I would go away and never see her again. The threat
appeared to terrify her. I persisted that the view of such affairs
taken by most people was entirely wrong. I showed that, on the
contrary, it was wrong to lie and say you do not love a person when
you do, that it was quite possible to talk of our love, to cherish it,
and to welcome its influences for good, without allowing it to get the
upper hand. All of which the poor fluttering little morsel of
sentiment drank in with greedy ears, because it was just what she
wanted to believe.

The child found us dull, and cried out that he wanted to play, so I
left her and returned to keep an appointment with Lord Gascoyne.
Esther Lane was included in the dinner-party that evening, and I again
took her in. The arrangement was not so pleasant as on the previous
occasion, for there was a distinct feeling of strain between us. I
surmounted it with ease; but she was without experience, and she
suffered. I could see that she had been crying.

“You must not let yourself be wretched,” I said, as we stood a little
apart from the others waiting for the move towards the dining-room.
“It hurts me.”

“I had intended to remain in my room,” she murmured.

“Why?”

“I feel as if everyone must see that I am an impostor.”

I was about to reply lightly, but checked myself, remembering that the
heroine of the comedy was an _ingénue_.

“If you were not so good you would not have a sense of guilt where
there is no guilt.”

We went in to dinner.

I talked to her incessantly, and inasmuch as her happiness lay in
being with me, she was prepared to be charmed out of her misery for
however brief a period.

I was myself somewhat astonished at the hold I had secured over her so
soon. I suppose in her inmost heart she was dreaming dreams in which
all would come right. But even if I were safely ensconced as Earl
Gascoyne I could not have made such a sacrifice as to marry her.
Besides, in the sense of a mate, to take my name and reign with me, I
would not have changed Edith Gascoyne for anyone in the world, not
even for Sibella.

There is among modern English ballads one which has always struck me
as having a claim to live because of its simplicity and the
heart-throb in it. It is called ‘For ever and for ever.’ It possesses
a perfect blending of music and idea, unpretentious, but full of
feeling.

As before, we spent the evening at the piano, and I sang this song to
her almost under my breath:

  “I would, alas! it were not so

  For ever and for ever.”

I could see that the tears were raining down her cheeks as she
listened. She held a fan so as to conceal her face from the others in
the room.

“We shall see each other again soon,” I murmured, as I said
good-night.

Lord Gascoyne and I were the last to leave the smoking-room, and he
parted from me at the foot of the stairs that led to the bachelors’
quarters. My bedroom was half-way down a long corridor, at the end of
which there was a solid door, which gave on to the battlements. It was
bolted inside, but not locked, and I had more than once used it to
take an evening stroll when the inhabitants of Hammerton Castle were
asleep. This evening I opened the door noiselessly and walked out on
to the walls. It was a clear starlight night and bitterly cold. I did
not mind this, for I had on a thick fur coat. I strolled along,
thinking deeply, when suddenly I was brought to a standstill by a ray
of light that fell right across my path.

I looked in the direction from whence it came, and was astonished to
see Esther Lane leaning out of a window a few feet from me. The
terrace at this point took an abrupt turn, and a comparatively new
part of the castle had been built out at a tangent.

She had not noticed my approach, for I wore house-shoes, which made no
noise.

She was looking at the stars as if their ceaseless splendour might be
symbolic of an inevitable dawn of happiness somewhere. They could not
have been completely reassuring, for she was weeping, and as I stood
and watched, a convulsive sob broke from her. The picture of the
forlorn little dependent, a frail white figure in the patch of light,
with the gloomy towers and battlements of Hammerton looming round her,
affected me strangely. I leant forward over the low wall and murmured
her name.

“Esther!”

She started and looked round, drawing back quickly as she saw me
clearly defined in the moonlight.

“You must not cry. It breaks my heart.”

At the moment I fully believed what I said.

Her eyes, full of tears, were turned upon me, and, with a strange look
of fear, which haunts me to this hour, she said:

“I thought I should never see you again.”

“You were going away?”

She saw that she had betrayed her intention, and tried to excuse
herself.

“It will be better.”

“Why? If you go away I shall never come here again.”

I was upon the low wall, the ground full sixty feet below me.

“Oh, go back! you will fall.”

But I had my hand on her window-sill and one foot on a ledge a short
distance below it, whilst the other remained on the wall. She was
helpless; to have attempted to stay me would have been to send me in
all probability to certain death. She clasped her hands and held her
breath. The next moment I was in the room and by her side.

“Don’t be afraid; only I must speak to you. We must understand each
other.”

“Oh, go away, please.”

She hid her face in her hands, utterly shamed by the presence of a man
in her room.

Poor Esther! I think she was happier. I verily believe that every
woman is happier for love fulfilled. I knew that once having chosen
her path she would follow it unflinchingly, and that she would be true
as steel. I had discerned from the first that she was capable of
martyrdom. From that day she never mentioned the word marriage. She
declared ever afterwards that it was her fault, that she should have
closed her window on me, that she had accepted the position of
mistress, and that she could not complain.

At the same time, however, it was no easy task to persuade her to
remain at Hammerton. She implored me to let her come away to London.
She vowed that she would not be an encumbrance, not even an expense.
She was sure that she could get work to do, sufficient to keep
herself; but I was firm. I had at one time some idea of letting her
live at Clapham in my deserted house, but I had always had a
superstition about allowing anyone else to live in it, otherwise I
should have sold it long before. Besides, I did not see what excuse
she was to give Lady Gascoyne for wishing to leave her, and the latter
had grown so fond of her that it was not likely she would accept her
resignation without a great deal of inquiry. Esther declared that
living a lie made her feel miserable, that she was unworthy of her
charge, and ought to resign it.



Chapter XXIII

I had still made no plans as regards Lord Gascoyne and his heir. I
must confess that I had qualms about the child, which shows how
illogical and unreasoning sentiment is. It is surely a greater crime
to kill a grown individual who has a place in the practical work of
the world, and who would be missed by hundreds, than to remove an
infant whose loss could only affect his parents. It was not easy for
me to inflict pain on a child, as my fondness for children is
exceptional. The means would have to be sudden and violent, and they
were difficult to think of. It might have been made to appear that his
death had been caused through some apparent negligence of the nurse,
had not the latter been a careful old lady through whose hands two
former generations of the Hammertons had passed. I had, unperceived,
followed her in her walks with the Gascoyne heir, and I was afraid it
would be impossible to find her careless.

I was prepared to make away with father or child first; whichever
event came most readily to hand would have to take place. A novice
might have been impatient, but experience had taught me that one had
only to watch and wait, and the opportunity would come at the most
unexpected moment.

It was nearly time for Miss Gascoyne and her uncle and aunt to return
to town. I was wondering whether they would be asked down with me to
Hammerton. It would be somewhat awkward, but I had infinite belief in
my own powers of dissimulation and tact.

In the meantime I concentrated my thoughts on little Lord Hammerton. I
had read of a child being smothered by a cat going to sleep over its
mouth. For a time the somewhat impracticable idea possessed me of
obtaining a gutta-percha baby, which I would fill with hot water and
arrange so that it could breathe mechanically, and then train a cat to
lie upon it. The weirdness and humour of the idea commended itself to
me. The far-fetched nature of the scheme, however, became more
apparent the more I considered it.

I thought I might become a proficient with the catapult, and aim at
the child unseen. In such a case the blame would probably fall on a
village boy. This, too, seemed rather far-fetched.

I had seen Hammerton’s nursery, or rather nurseries. Even a child of
his rank seldom has such a suite of apartments:—a night and day
nursery of lofty proportions, with rooms for the head-nurse and her
assistant opening off. It was the size and loftiness of the rooms that
were exceptional. Lady Gascoyne was a great enthusiast on hygiene, and
declared that fresh air was the best food a child could have. In fact,
I was not likely to be spared my unpleasant task through any neglect
of the little Viscount’s health.

My objection to inflicting pain upon a child gradually grew weaker.
Something had to be done.

I was seriously considering the matter when Providence put a weapon
into my hand.

I arrived one Saturday evening to find Lady Gascoyne somewhat uneasy.
Walter Chard was not well. Something quite trifling, no doubt, but he
was feverish.

I asked if I might go and see him, but Lady Gascoyne said that she
would rather I did not. It was always difficult to say how these
childish ailments would develop. It might be something infectious, and
she had Hammerton to think of. If anything happened to him Lord
Gascoyne would be broken-hearted.

“Miss Lane is with him,” went on Lady Gascoyne. “She absolutely
declines to allow anyone else to nurse him.”

I wondered whether Esther Lane had known that her undertaking to nurse
the child would prevent her from seeing me. For the moment I was a
little annoyed, as even the most supercilious man will be when he
imagines the woman he is thinking of very much at the moment has found
a duty which she places above her love.

  ‘I could not love thee, dear, so much,

  Loved I not honour more,’

is very trash in the case of both sexes. People who say they cannot
love where they cannot respect are talking nonsense. Affection is
independent of and survives prejudice, which I should surmise is an
added terror in the lives of good people.

“You are not afraid of infection, are you?” asked Lady Gascoyne.

“Oh dear no, but what makes you think it is something infectious?”

“I don’t know. I had a sort of instinct that it was so directly I
looked at Walter.”

I thought nothing more of Walter Chard during my visit except to ask
how he was.

“The doctor says he cannot decide for a few hours what is the matter
with him,” replied Lady Gascoyne.

On Monday morning, however, the Castle was thrown into a state of the
greatest consternation. The doctor pronounced him to be suffering from
scarlet fever, and Lord and Lady Gascoyne were filled with alarm for
the safety of their own child.

Walter Chard had been constantly with him, and any moment little Lord
Hammerton might develop the complaint.

The sick child was immediately secluded at the extreme end of the
castle, and a trained nurse was sent for. From the moment I heard that
it was scarlet fever my mind was at work. Supposing Hammerton did not
develop the complaint, would it be possible to convey the infection to
him?

If I could get near Walter Chard in the convalescent stage it would be
easy enough.

Of course, it did not follow that even if Lord Hammerton took the
infection he would die, but there was the chance that he might.

Lady Gascoyne talked of removing him from the castle at once, but the
doctor decided that it was not necessary.

“Our patient is too far away to do any mischief. He is for practical
purposes quite isolated, and if you disinfect the rooms he has been
living in you need not be in the least alarmed.”

On my return to town I waited a week, and then wrote to Lady Gascoyne,
saying that I hoped Lord Hammerton showed no signs of having caught
the infection. I displayed so exactly the right amount of solicitude
that on meeting Lord Gascoyne in town he greeted me, for him, almost
effusively.

“My wife was quite touched, Rank. Naturally, we were alarmed, but I
fancy it’s all right. The other little chap will soon be on the road
to recovery. Come down with me to-morrow if you are not afraid.”

It was exactly what I wanted. The chance might not again offer itself
to carry out my design. I met Lord Gascoyne at Waterloo, and we
travelled down together. It was the sort of travelling that suited me
to perfection; a saloon carriage had been reserved for us, and all
along the line we were treated like royalty.

I had been a little surprised that when he and Lady Gascoyne attended
anything in the shape of a function in the neighbourhood of Hammerton
they rode in a chariot with outriders. The effect was singularly
picturesque, and appealed to my Jewish love of colour. I determined
that if ever I succeeded I would retain the custom.

When we reached Hammerton we found Lady Gascoyne at the station, quite
radiant. Notwithstanding that the patient was at the most infectious
stage, there was very little danger, owing to the complete way in
which he had been isolated.

I was the only guest, and we retired early. I had, of course, seen
nothing of Esther Lane. As I walked on the terrace and smoked my cigar
I wondered if she were thinking of me. I paused at a spot which was at
the extreme end of one of the horns of a semicircle. At the end
opposite to me were the rooms in which she was nursing her invalid. I
stood looking at them thoughtfully. I was thinking of what Lady
Gascoyne had said as to the disease now being at its most infectious
stage. Contact, or the use of the same article, such as a towel or a
handkerchief, might convey the infection. I might be doing something
to advance my cause instead of idly puffing at my cigar. The invalid’s
rooms were several hundred feet away, and to reach them I should have
to scale a parapet some ten feet in height, but it was no more than I
could manage. I walked slowly round the semicircle. The night was
strangely mild, and it was not improbable that the windows would be
open.

I knew the apartments. They had once been occupied by a mad Earl
Gascoyne, and had in his day been securely barred.

These bars had, however, long since been removed, and I remembered
thinking the rooms almost the pleasantest in the castle. They were
some distance from the rest of the living part. When I reached the
terrace I saw that there was a narrow stone staircase which I had not
before noticed. At the top of this was an iron gate which would have
to be climbed. Just then I heard steps on the terrace above me, and I
had hardly time to draw into the shadow of a buttress when Esther Lane
appeared, leaning over the low wall above my head. I threw down my
cigar and stamped on it, for it might have been its scent borne on the
night air which had attracted her.

She looked about her for a few seconds and went back. I waited for an
hour or so until the lights were turned down for the night. I wondered
which of the two women was watching by the bedside of the invalid.

After a time I ascended the staircase and surveyed the iron gate at
the top. It looked rickety, and it would be difficult to climb over it
without making a noise. If the trained nurse found me it would not be
easy to explain my presence.

I climbed over the gate and dropped on to the other side. In the still
night air it rattled horribly, but no one seemed to have heard. I had
on house-shoes, and stole cautiously forward. I knew that the
temporary hospital was a large room with three windows opening to the
ground. Danger being almost out of the question here, the windows had
been left partly open. I stole cautiously forward and looked in. By
the dim light I saw the sick child lying on a bed well out in the
middle of the room. On a long, low chair by the fire lay Esther Lane,
in a white dressing-gown. I thought she looked exceedingly beautiful,
if a little worn with watching. Crossing to the window furthest from
where she lay, and having quite assured myself that she was asleep, I
entered cautiously and looked round. I went first to the door that I
knew gave on to the corridor. Luckily, the key was on the inside, and
I locked it. There was another door leading to an inner room, which
made me a little anxious, as I concluded that it was occupied by the
nurse. It had no key, and I quietly placed a chair in front of it.
Noiselessly I stole towards the bed. The child’s flushed face was
resting on his hand, in which was clasped a handkerchief. This was the
very thing I wanted, and with infinite care I managed to unclasp the
little fingers and draw it forth without waking him. Wrapping it in my
own handkerchief, I thrust them both into my pocket.

I had just finished and was turning away when I became aware that
Esther Lane’s eyes were slowly opening upon me.

Luckily she did not cry out, but rose quickly with a half-smothered
exclamation. As I went swiftly but silently to her I heard the boy
stir in the bed behind me, and we both stood waiting in suspense to
see if he would wake. Luckily he only murmured once or twice, and sank
to sleep again. I was near the light, however, and ready to extinguish
it at once should he show the least sign of waking. When his regular
breathing had reassured me I drew her on to the terrace.

“I was obliged to come,” I murmured passionately. “I had to see you.”

“You should not have done it,” she said helplessly.—“you should not
have done it.”

“I am very sorry.”

I took my cue and passed into the mood of the reckless, love-sick
youth. I knew that to feel a passion is the only way to be convincing.

“It is dangerous, and most dangerous now.” She began to weep; she was
evidently unstrung from watching. I drew her away into a sheltered
corner of the battlements, where the moon made it almost as light as
day.

I told her that I was only happy when I was with her, and that all my
days in London were given up to thinking of her. The poor child
believed me. It appeared that she had been attempting to make some
expiation for what she considered the betrayal of Lady Gascoyne’s
confidence by her devotion to Walter Chard during his illness.

I held her in my arms, and we remained perfectly happy and in silence
for a long time. She certainly stirred my blood to an extraordinary
degree.

She was terrified lest my visit should convey infection to the rest of
the household. I reassured her. At the same time, her having seen me
was very awkward. Hers was a character which, impelled by conscience,
might be capable of all sorts of extraordinary things, great
renunciations and burning sacrifices. I held out a vague promise of
taking her to London and allowing her to a certain extent to share in
my life. This filled her with a guilty delight, and she clung to me
with a sigh. Love in its fierce, personal aspect meant more to her
than to any woman I have ever met.

The poor little soul went back and procured some strong stuff with
which she instructed me to disinfect my clothing.

I returned to my room almost laughing with glee at having the
handkerchief from the sick boy’s bed with me.

When I reached my bedroom I packed the two handkerchiefs carefully up
in several layers of paper and then went to bed. Of course, I had to
reckon with the fact that I might take the infection, but I will do
myself the justice to say that at no time during my career have I been
much affected by a consideration for my own safety. It has always
appeared to me that an absolute disregard for my life was the only
method on which to proceed.

The next morning I excused myself from accompanying Lord and Lady
Gascoyne to church. Lady Gascoyne quite sympathised with me.

“A gallop will do you much more good.”

I thanked her, but said I preferred a tramp.

As soon as they had walked over to the church I made my way to Lord
Hammerton’s nursery. I was no stranger to it, and was a favourite with
the nurses. The little viscount knew me quite well, and crowed
directly I appeared.

Old Mrs. Howick looked at me indulgently as I took the child in my
arms. After a time she went into the inner room, leaving me in
possession for a few minutes. I hastily took out of my pocket the
handkerchief, which was still wrapped in my own, and let it fall
across the child’s face. He clutched it with two little fat hands, and
I allowed him to play with it, and then thrust it in between his frock
and his chest and left it there. I had previously taken good care to
ascertain that it was unmarked, and was not likely to be recognised.

When the nurse came back I was still playing with the child, and she
took him from me and dressed him for his morning’s outing without
discovering the presence of the handkerchief.

I then went for a long tramp through the woods, laughing at myself for
what I could not help feeling to be a piece of absurdity. On my return
to the house I went again to the nursery. The little viscount was
asleep, and I managed to extract the handkerchief and lay it where the
air he was breathing must pass over it. Then I removed it, and
congratulated myself that I had left no foolish clue whereby my action
might be identified. Mrs. Howick was delighted at my attentions, and
told Lady Gascoyne that she never had seen his lordship take to anyone
as he had taken to me. Inwardly I hoped that he might take to the
infection with even greater ardour.

There was still the question of Esther Lane to be dealt with, if it
were possible to deal with it at all. If the child should fall ill she
would be sure to think of me and find out whether I had been to visit
him. As is always the case, my romantic susceptibilities had landed me
in a position of danger which all my other intrigues had not done. If
Esther Lane should tell the truth, my entire house of cards would fall
to the ground. The telling of the truth would involve a general
exposure. It would mean farewell to Miss Gascoyne, and also the
shutting of the gates of Hammerton Castle in my face, which would be a
far more fatal obstacle to my success.

I did not bless the day on which I had met Esther Lane, and further
cursed my own weakness. This is a habit of men when they have obtained
their desire.

I should have remembered the dictum of a celebrated countryman of my
own, which prophesies material doom for those who are unable to
control their affections. He should perhaps have substituted another
word for affections.

There were no measures for self-protection to be taken as far as I
could see. My strongest card was Esther’s love for me, and if that
were not strong enough to prevent her betraying me, nothing would. I
had wit enough to see that it was likely to prove a still stronger
weapon if I kept away from her.

I waited some days, and read one morning in a halfpenny paper which
deals in such tittle-tattle that Lord and Lady Gascoyne were in the
greatest anxiety about their only child, the heir to the title, who
was suffering from a severe attack of scarlet fever.

I had had several false alarms as to whether I myself had not caught
the infection, and having gone to bed one evening feeling very seedy
and convinced that I had, was not a little relieved on waking the next
morning to find myself perfectly well.

I wrote a note of sympathy to Lady Gascoyne, and the same day received
a wild letter of self-reproach from Esther Lane. She accused herself
of being a murderess, and of having betrayed Lady Gascoyne’s
confidence in the most despicable manner. There was only one way out
of her misery, she declared, and that was by suicide. I hardly dared
hope that she would take any step so drastic, or so convenient. I was
much reassured as to my own safety by her imploring me not to write to
her, as she did not know what might happen, and if her correspondence
were opened it might involve my ruin, and she blamed nobody but
herself.

The unexpected happened. Lord Hammerton died, and I was now very near
the succession indeed.

This was the time to strike. Whatever happened, Lord Gascoyne must go,
and as quickly as possible.

I was asked down to the funeral. Lady Gascoyne wrote me a heart-broken
letter, recalling the fondness of the dead child for me.

Mr. and Mrs. Gascoyne and Edith had returned to London the day before
the catastrophe.

“It seems, Israel,” said Mr. Gascoyne, “as if the direct line were
doomed to extinction. I sincerely pray that the title may never pass
to me. It would be really very inconvenient at my time of life and
with all my other interests. It is not likely, however, for my life is
not as good a one as most people imagine.”

I looked at him earnestly. This was the first I had heard of his
health being anything but exceedingly good.

He interpreted my glance in his own way.

“Don’t be alarmed, Israel. Nothing immediate is likely to happen, but
my doctor tells me my heart is not the sound organ it ought to be, and
that I must be very careful.”

“You must leave as much of the work to me as possible, sir,” I said
feelingly.

“So I do, so I do, Israel; but you don’t want to turn me out
altogether, do you?”

I looked hurt.

“My dear boy,” he continued good-humouredly, “I should not have
ventured to take so long a holiday if I had not had you to depend on.
Let us go to lunch and talk things over.”

I found that talking things over meant that he was anxious to make
matters easier for my marriage, and, in fact, he made them so easy
that Miss Gascoyne and I were able to fix a date within two months of
their return.

Once we were married I did not mind so much what Edith discovered.
Nevertheless, I had to admit that if I was frightened of anybody I was
frightened of my future wife. I had imagined at one time that it would
be possible to live with her on quite a dignified, unfamiliar footing,
but I had now realised what I ought to have guessed before, that Miss
Gascoyne to the man she loved was very different from the woman the
world knew. Perhaps that is a wrong way of putting it. She was
English, and a certain self-consciousness towards the world at large
was born of a morbid dread of betraying the strength of her nature to
the vulgar.



Chapter XXIV

Although Sibella had more or less accustomed herself to the idea of my
marriage, the nearness of its approach gave her somewhat of a shock.
Woman-like, she wanted to meet Miss Gascoyne, but on this point I was
firm. After we had been married some time such a thing might be
possible, but not till then. Personally, I had no intention of
bringing about the introduction. The women with whom one has relations
are best kept apart. A chance word or look, unsuspected even by
ourselves, might give a clue to the truth. The whole thing would make
me too nervous. She asked me whether if Lionel died I would break off
my engagement and marry her. I replied that of course I would do so,
and though I do not suppose she believed it any more than I meant it,
the statement seemed to comfort her mightily.

Mr. Gascoyne and I went down to Lord Hammerton’s funeral.

We only saw Lady Gascoyne for a moment. She was too overwhelmed to
hold conversation with anyone for long. Lord Gascoyne was wonderfully
self-controlled, but he looked very careworn. I had begun to
understand him, and I could see that he was much touched by Mr.
Gascoyne’s solicitude. He mentioned Miss Lane in the course of the
morning.

“She is utterly broken down. She seems to have some idea that
carelessness on her part is responsible. Of course, it is nobody’s
fault, although I think we ought to have gone away directly Walter
fell ill. However, it is no use saying what ought to have been done.”

“What is the doctor’s opinion as to how the infection was carried?”
ventured Mr. Gascoyne.

“He seems utterly perplexed. From what I can gather from the other
doctors he is not to blame. He blames himself, of course. Well, it is
a great grief to us, but we shall get over it; and, after all, we are
young.”

I knew what he meant, and I could only sincerely hope that my chance
might come soon.

The funeral was extremely stately for so small a corpse. The tiny
coffin was borne into the castle church on a bier that had evidently
been accustomed to heavier burdens. The church was full. It was quite
evident that as regards that part of the country the heir of the
Gascoynes was considered an almost royal personage.

Esther Lane was in the church, looking terribly worn and ill. Once I
thought she glanced at me almost fiercely, but she wore a crape veil,
and I could not be sure. I did not see her, for Mr. Gascoyne and I
returned to town in the evening. Two days later, however, when I was
dressing for dinner, a note was brought up to me in her handwriting.
The lady, the man said, would wait for an answer. I opened it in
almost a fever of excitement, fully expecting to read that conscience
had won the day, and that she had confessed all, but the note only
asked me to see her. Two minutes later she was in my room and in my
arms sobbing wildly, but declaring that, however much she was prepared
to sacrifice herself, she would not betray me.

She was thirsting for some little display of love. Her loneliness had
been more than she could bear, and her guilt had added to its terrors.
Poor little soul! my love meant so much to her that in a few minutes
she was smiling almost cheerfully.

She had told them at Hammerton that her nerves were on the point of
breaking down, and that she must have change; and she was now on her
way to spend a few weeks with some friends in the North.

I showed her how we might steal two days on her return and spend them
together at a small seaside village that I knew of on the Yorkshire
coast. It would be very near my marriage-day, and it was the sort of
thing which always held vague possibilities of discovery, but still I
am glad I risked it.

Esther interested me enormously. I had never come across quite her
type before. That, with her high moral stamina, she should so
completely accept any scheme of deception which I chose to propose was
extraordinary, but so it was. With me she seemed to have no will but
mine.

It was curious that she did not reproach me with the death of Lord
Hammerton, but hers was not the nature to blame others for any guilt
of which she had to admit a share.

She must have concluded that my visiting Lord Hammerton’s nursery the
morning after I had been in Walter Chard’s sick-room was responsible
for the tragedy.

I had expected a torrent of reproaches on this score, and was very
pleased that she said nothing. The curious moral numbness from which
she suffered when with me seemed to have put the memory of it out of
her mind.



Chapter XXV

I now made the great mistake of my career.

I had so far proceeded with extraordinary deliberation. I had from the
first realised the danger of hurry. For a time I forgot caution, and
that is why I, Israel Rank Gascoyne, Earl Gascoyne, Viscount
Hammerton, am writing my memoirs in a condemned cell instead of living
in almost feudal splendour in Hammerton Castle.

As Lord Gascoyne had said, he and his wife were young, and there was
every prospect of another heir. I had no time to lose. The way in
which all the heirs of the House of Gascoyne had died off was
beginning to attract attention. People had discovered that I was very
close to the succession, and I was now a welcome guest at many houses
which had hitherto been closed to me. Lady Branksome had evidently
taken back her remark about the synagogue, for she was sweetness
itself. Sibella appreciated my position fully, and began to regret her
marriage with Lionel, saying that she had made a great mistake, and
that she ought to have waited. She had long since told me that Lionel
bored her terribly.

“He isn’t even wicked or vicious,” she complained; “he is only weak.”

I said that I was astonished that she should have taken so long to
discover so obvious a fact.

She might have answered, had she been clever enough, that in a woman’s
eyes the fine animal will stand for a great many virtues, and that the
illusion has a habit of lasting a very long while. The truth of the
matter was, however, that the thoroughly unhealthy life which Lionel
led had quite destroyed any physical charm he had ever possessed. He
developed a capacity for middle age which was quite startling. He
might have possessed Jewish blood, judging by the speed of his
transition from slim boyishness to stale maturity. Sibella, who was
extraordinarily fastidious on the subject of physical beauty, noticed
it very soon. Considering that she was married to him, the discovery
did her credit. I have known so many people marry for beauty and
afterwards show the most extraordinary callousness to its decay. I
suppose the romantic resource of most people gives out after one
attack.

Sibella’s was not the kind of organisation to become phlegmatic.
Robbed of her essential food—excitement—she would have become
querulous and irritable, but she could never settle into the
easy-going. It was a proof of her opulent temperament that I verily
believe she had been somewhat in love with Lionel and myself at the
same time. Lionel now grated on her in proportion to the fascination
he had once exercised.

I was only afraid that she might find my divided attention all too
insufficient. Sir Anthony Cross had somewhat dropped off. The
pertinacity of the most fervid lover cannot withstand perpetual
disappointment, and he was beginning to realise that he had set his
heart on the moon. I think he realised also that I was laughing at him
for the effusive civility with which he had treated me whilst he
thought I was playing his game, a civility which had long since given
way to marked coolness. This I did not mind, for the time had now
passed when he could be useful to me. I should have attempted to
conciliate him if I had thought otherwise. I knew that in his heart of
hearts he had always disliked me, though at the same time my Jewish
blood taught me not to create one more enemy than was necessary.

My marriage drew near, and a cloud of family connections descended on
Miss Gascoyne. People who would some time before have denied that I
was in any way connected with the Gascoynes, thought it such a nice
thing that she was marrying one of the family, and though it was
improbable that dear Mr. Rank would ever succeed, still, one never
knew; whilst any reference to my Jewish blood was no doubt met with:
‘Oh, I don’t know; perhaps a very slight strain;’ which, considering
my appearance, was ridiculous.

I went the length of presenting myself with a wedding-gift from the
imaginary Parsons family. It was the sort of thing which I did not
like doing. It is always difficult to say how active deception in
small things will end, and no wise criminal encumbers himself with a
number of petty deceptions. They clog his footsteps, and, besides, the
trifles of life should be used to build up a reputation for veracity
and good fellowship. It is limiting to play for small stakes. An
attention to detail is imperative, but the detail must be essential
and not superfluous. Still, considering that I had made so much of the
Parsons’ devotion to me, it would have looked strange if they had not
sent me something, even from Canada.



Chapter XXVI

I cannot quite decide whether it was the preparations and natural
excitement consequent on my marriage, or whether much success had made
me careless, but certain it was that I conducted my campaign against
Lord Gascoyne, the most delicate affair of all, with a lack of
forethought which candour compels me to admit has very justly brought
me to this place.

I believe it would have been better if I had dealt with him some time
before. Now I come to think the matter over, it would obviously have
been better to leave the Reverend Henry alive, and to have waited my
opportunity in the case of Lord Hammerton. I should then have appeared
so much further from the succession that suspicion would not have been
aroused.

In the first place, I was much too hasty in deciding on the means by
which I intended to remove Lord Gascoyne. To have decided on vulgar,
common-place poison at such a crisis was an error in judgment for
which there is really no excuse.

Miss Gascoyne and I were to spend a few days at Hammerton at the
conclusion of our honeymoon, and I chose that occasion for the
completion of my task. It would then be practically finished, for I
had no intention of getting rid of Mr. Gascoyne. A natural feeling of
gratitude towards so excellent a man was my first objection, and I did
not think there would be any necessity. I should not, I imagined, have
long to wait, and a few years in the position of heir would be by no
means unpleasant.

I was obliged to ask Lionel and Sibella to my wedding, but Sibella, I
was glad to find, had not the least intention of being present. She
made herself perfectly ill about it, and my one prayer was that she
might not become hysterical. Women in a state of hysteria do such
extraordinary things.

We were married somewhat quietly, considering all things. I don’t
think my wife ever looked more beautiful. Hers was too deep a nature
not to take so serious a thing as marriage somewhat sadly. The
service, to my mind, was a little cold. My taste for ritual was
Oriental, and I could have wished that my wife-elect had belonged to
the Roman communion in order that there might have been more
splendour. I should have been quite prepared to become a nominal child
of Rome had it been necessary.

We spent our somewhat short honeymoon at a place called the Green
Manor, a small country-house belonging to Lord and Lady Gascoyne, a
fact which quite placed us as a married couple.

I had manœuvred so that our honeymoon should be a short one, giving as
a plea that Mr. Gascoyne’s health was far from good, and that I did
not care to neglect the business. My wife at once fell in with the
idea. The truth of the matter was that I was anxious for our visit to
Hammerton to take place as soon as possible. With my marriage,
however, there came a new terror into my life. I was full of fear that
I might say something in my sleep which might give a clue to my
secret. A chance word might do it. Still, it was a risk I was obliged
to take. If I had been in love with my wife to a certain extent before
marriage, I cannot say that my passion lasted very long. I fancy she
brought to what I had always looked upon as a delirious relaxation too
strenuous an ideal. With her it could not have been otherwise. I
managed to conceal the fact from her with considerable success, but
the truth was that she got on my nerves. She was a great creature, but
she was on a different plane from myself, and it made things very
difficult. A good woman, however, being without experience, is always
more easily deceived. If this were not so the artificial arrangements
which are supposed to safeguard society would have disappeared long
ago.

The life she was always sketching out for us, to her so beautiful and
noble, was to me excessively dreary. Doing good appeared to be its
chief entertainment. We were apparently to spend our money—all too
little for the wants of a young couple who wished to make a decent
figure in society—on other people. I foresaw a very speedy parting of
our ways. I was strong, and she was strong, and it was impossible that
either should impose views on the other. She was one of those women
who are perfectly prepared to follow love to heaven, but who have not
the least intention of being led in the contrary direction. Conscience
with her was supreme. I was determined, however, that nothing should
appear at all wrong during Mr. Gascoyne’s lifetime, or until I was in
safe possession of Hammerton and the title. Mr. Gascoyne’s fortune
amounted to close on a hundred thousand pounds. This would, I knew,
come to my wife and myself, and if I suffered defeat, it would be a
very pleasant addition to our own capital; and though I did not think
that, except in extreme circumstances, Mr. Gascoyne was likely to
leave his money away from us, it was possible that if he had an idea
that I was not making quite the husband he expected he might settle it
somewhat too exclusively on Edith.

I set myself, therefore, to study the art of concealing from her that
her ideals bored me, and that her outlook on life was too serious. At
the same time I bantered her a little, and tried to bring her into an
atmosphere of gaiety. She was ready to attempt a greater levity of
manner to please me. The effort was somewhat of a failure, for saints
off their pedestals never present an absolutely dignified appearance.

Our honeymoon was a success, however. A man of taste and imagination
can never be quite dull when in possession of a beautiful woman, not,
at any rate, until the novelty has worn off. Serious though Edith was,
she did not exhaust herself in a fortnight.

We arrived at Hammerton in due course, to find Mr. and Mrs. Gascoyne
of the party. The reception that Lord and Lady Gascoyne gave us was
quite feudal and eminently flattering. I inwardly promised his
lordship that if it were in my power he should have a magnificent
funeral.

It was quite a family gathering. Naturally, we had not expected many
people to be asked to meet us, as they were still in deep mourning. It
had been very nice of them to ask us at all, considering the
circumstances. I had grown so accustomed to pose as one of the
mourners at a tragedy of my own making that the situation had ceased
even to possess weirdness.

It was a little awkward that my wife took an immediate fancy to Esther
Lane. It was surely against all the laws of human nature that Esther
Lane should reciprocate the liking.

It seemed to me that from the moment she met my wife her whole manner
towards me changed.

I think she began instinctively to distrust a man who could behave so
badly—from her point of view—to a woman like Edith. I don’t think she
entirely believed all I had said about my marriage being one of mere
convenience. Before I had had an opportunity of seeing her alone, in
the course of a few remarks which we hurriedly interchanged while we
were looking over some songs after dinner, she told me that she could
not understand any man not loving a woman so beautiful and good. I
could see that without saying as much she was a little surprised that
Edith and I should have come together. She had a fine instinct and
perhaps realised how unsuited we must be.

I was anxious to have a private conversation with her, but she
declared that it was quite impossible, that she was not so depraved as
I imagined her to be.

When I did manage to get a few words with her alone I found that she
was adamant. It was certain that she had changed to an extraordinary
degree, and somehow she gave me an uncomfortable and somewhat sinister
impression of being a possible danger. She did not deny that she still
loved me a great deal too much for her own peace of mind, and I have
no doubt that if I had had a free hand as to the time I could spend
with her I might have had my own way, but I was occupied with other
things, and in particular I was occupied with Lord Gascoyne.

I had decided that after dinner, whilst Lord Gascoyne and I were
sitting over our wine I would try, if possible, to carry out the
finishing stroke of my policy.

Evening after evening I sat within arm’s length of him without the
desired opportunity occurring.

Lord Gascoyne was in the habit of drinking claret after dinner. His
cellar of this wine was quite remarkable. He was, however, a moderate
drinker, and I do not think that beyond a couple of glasses after
dinner he ever took anything at all. Sometimes he drank
whisky-and-soda in the smoking-room, but very rarely. Indeed, we were
a most abstemious couple.

It was towards the end of my visit when the opportunity occurred. One
evening as we were sitting over our wine a servant came in and
announced that there was a fellow-magistrate in the justice-room who
wished to see him, if only for two minutes.

He left the room, saying that he would not be long, and with the usual
conventional admonition to help myself. Now was my chance. My courage
failed me for a few minutes, and then I made the greatest mistake I
could have done. His glass was empty, and so I poisoned what remained
in the bottle. As I had the bottle in my hand a servant entered in
search of Lord Gascoyne’s eyeglasses. He saw me with the bottle in my
hand, and noticing that my glass was empty, and knowing I drank port,
filled it. As I was wondering what I should do, Lord Gascoyne
re-entered and seated himself.

I gazed at the bottle before him, fascinated. I would have given
worlds to get rid of it. Just as I was thinking of doing something to
upset it, he poured out a glass and began to drink it. I saw at once
the whole chain of mistakes. I was the only person in the room. I had
been seen with the bottle in my hand. It would be next to impossible
to destroy the bottle with its damning evidence. I had also obtained
the arsenic from a chemist in the ordinary way. I had signed the wrong
name, and if I were recognised that would make the matter worse. I had
every motive for the crime—a motive which would stand out with
startling clearness after Lord Gascoyne’s death. I had felt nervous
before. Now I experienced a sensation of acute terror. I must have
shown it to some extent, for I turned pale, and Lord Gascoyne asked me
whether I was ill. I declared I felt quite well, although at the
moment he was taking another glass of claret.

I realised with an extraordinary feeling of depression that I was a
clumsy murderer walking about like any ordinary criminal with
blood-red hands, and trusting that nobody would notice their colour.

I watched Lord Gascoyne drinking his claret with sinking spirits, and
could only pray that he might be one of those people who possess an
inexplicable immunity to the poison I had used. It was not our custom
to remain long over our wine, and in about a quarter of an hour we
joined the three women in a small octagonal room off the
picture-gallery. As Lord Gascoyne and I walked along the dimly-lighted
picture-gallery towards the little room at the end I felt as if I were
in a dream. It seemed as if the presage of a Nemesis, tardy but
terrible, were upon me. The dark figures on the canvas stared down
upon him as he passed, claiming him as one of their ghostly company;
and I almost thought that his own picture, high above the great
mantelpiece carved in hundreds of twisted forms by Grinling Gibbons,
shivered as he walked below it. I expected every moment a cry of pain
or the first moan of faintness. I had to pull myself together, and by
the time we reached the others I had regained complete control. Lord
Gascoyne always drank tea instead of coffee after dinner, and on
occasions like this there were no servants, and it was made in a
delightfully informal way by Esther Lane. She asked me to carry Lord
Gascoyne’s cup to him, which I did and he took it from me with
murmured thanks.

I must still have shown traces of my recent agitation, for my wife
drew the attention of the others to my pallor. She had hardly done so
when Lord Gascoyne’s cup fell with a crash to the ground, and he sank
back into his chair in a dead faint.

The others went towards him at once, as I did also after the first
moment.

Lady Gascoyne said something about brandy, and Esther hurried from the
room to obtain it. Lord Gascoyne had somewhat recovered by the time
she returned, but very shortly relapsed into another faint. I saw that
my purpose was accomplished, and that before morning only Mr. Gascoyne
would stand between myself and all I coveted. Lord Gascoyne retired in
indescribable pain to his bedroom, and a groom was despatched for the
doctor. As for myself, I hurried to the dining-room in the hope of
being able to do away with the decanter of claret containing the
evidence of guilt. If the decanter were discovered, I should
immediately fall under suspicion. It could not be otherwise. Well, I
must be as calm as possible. On entering the dining-room I saw at once
that the decanter had been removed. My opportunity of destroying all
chance of detection was over. In reality it was here that I made the
fatal mistake, for I should have obtained possession of the decanter
at all costs and destroyed it, or at least have cleansed it. I should
have invented some excuse, seeing its paramount importance to me. I
was, however, too nervous of arousing suspicion. In fact, I had lost
my nerve for the time being without realising it. It is certain that
had I been as cool and self-possessed as I am now I should not be
here. I allowed the golden opportunity to slip. There was some excuse.
Lord Gascoyne was momentarily growing worse. Everyone in the castle
was in a state of alarm. I was seldom alone, for my wife hardly left
me except when she could be of use. I cursed myself for my stupidity
in not choosing a more rapid poison. I might at least have given the
foolish doctors an opportunity of declaring death to be due to natural
causes. The learned fellows require so little encouragement to commit
blunders.

I remember well the electric shock I received when, towards the
morning, one of the doctors stopped me in the corridor and said
something about its looking very much as if Lord Gascoyne had been
poisoned.

“Poisoned?” I asked in surprise.

“Yes; he must have eaten something which was poisoned. One never knows
in these days of food adulteration. One is safe nowhere—not even at
the best tables.”

I felt almost inclined to say that doctors themselves were curiously
lax on the subject, but I was too much alarmed at his having put his
finger on the spot at once to enter into an abstract discussion on the
ethics of the medical profession.

I was drawing him out in order to see how much he had guessed, when
his colleague came out of Lord Gascoyne’s apartment and called him in.
Coming along the corridor I met Esther Lane, seeking for news. I went
towards her. Was it my fancy, or did she shrink from me? It seemed to
me that she did, but I was in a weak, morbid state of mind, in which I
was a prey to fears of my own shadow. It was a dreary trio that met
round the breakfast-table. Lady Gascoyne did not appear, and Esther
always took her meals with her charge, except when she was specially
asked by Lady Gascoyne to join herself and her friends.

One of the doctors came in, but brought only bad news. In answer to
Mrs. Gascoyne’s inquiries he threw up his hands.

“We do not know what to make of it, and——”

He paused, as if afraid to go on.

“Please tell us,” said my wife anxiously.

“Well, of course, while there is life there is hope, but——”

“You don’t think——”

“I am afraid we must prepare for the worst.”

There was a long pause. The two women were horrified. I rose and went
to the window, as I knew not what guilt my face might betray.

Suddenly the end came. A wail shivered down the corridors, and then,
from where I was watching the bedroom door, I saw Lady Gascoyne led
out by Edith. After a few minutes the two doctors came out, and in
answer to my question, explained that all was over. I carried the news
to Mrs. Gascoyne. She was terribly distressed, and asked me to wire
for her husband, which of course I did. It suddenly struck me that it
might be possible to obtain the decanter that evening at dinner. I
supposed there would be dinner. There usually is, even at moments of
the greatest stress. Curiously enough, the whole thing once over, I
began to recover my nerve rapidly, and by the time Mr. Gascoyne had
arrived I was quite myself. I did not know that, even at that moment,
the junior doctor was conducting an examination into what Lord
Gascoyne had eaten and drunk the evening before, and giving orders
that everything which had been left was to remain untouched.

I think such a knowledge would have tempted me to buy some means of
retiring from the scene on an emergency. I had not even a loaded
revolver. It was evident I was not the clever person I had imagined
myself to be.

Mr. Gascoyne could hardly believe the news.

“Israel, it is terrible. There seems to be a curse on the family.” He
was silent for a few moments, and then continued thoughtfully:
“Israel, has it struck you what this means to you? Failing male heirs,
the title descends through a woman. Your grandfather would have been
the last male heir, therefore your mother would have succeeded as his
heiress, and then you.”

We had talked this over before, but I pretended to think of it deeply,
as if it now presented itself to me seriously for the first time.

“Of course, it has struck me, but the possibilities seemed so remote.”

“They are close enough now. It would seem as if Fate had been on your
side.”

I certainly hoped that it was. He little knew that that fate in its
concrete form was sitting opposite to him.

“What do you think was the cause of death, Israel?”

“Nobody seems quite to know.”

“He looked just that sinewy, tough sort of man who was likely to live
for ever.”

I was silent.

“There must have been something organically wrong,” Mr. Gascoyne
continued.

I was still silent, meditating whether I should tell him what the
doctor had hinted at as regards poison. I decided that it would be
better to do so. It would look very strange if he should discover that
the doctor had already suggested such a thing to me, and that I had
ignored the fact.

“Dr. Phillimore thinks that death must have been caused by some
violent poison.”

“Poison? Impossible!”

“So I said. I don’t suppose he meant for one moment that anybody had
poisoned him.”

I regretted this remark. It might rouse suspicions in his brain. The
nervous analysis of everything I said was becoming automatic.

“He was taken ill directly after dinner, you say?”

“When we left the dining-room.”

“If it had been anything he had eaten you would all have been taken
ill as well.”

“It would seem so. At least, I don’t know. There may have been some
dish which we others did not touch.”

“It is all very mysterious, but it is quite possible that the doctors
may be wrong.”

“Oh, quite,” I said dryly.

The rest of the drive he spent in asking after Lady Gascoyne, and for
other details of the affair.

As we entered the great hall I saw the two doctors at a distant window
in earnest consultation.

They came forward and greeted Mr. Gascoyne as the Earl.

They had evidently been waiting for him. Dr. Phillimore, the younger
of the two, who had been called in in consultation, said at once:

“Dr. Grange is anxious for a private interview with you when you are
at liberty.”

I had from the first felt nervous of Dr. Phillimore. He was evidently
a man of exceptional intellectual power. He had a massive, square
forehead, and a strong resolute face with an expression of great
alertness. Even now, although he had had no rest for twenty-four
hours, he showed few traces of fatigue. Dr. Grange, on the other hand,
looked worn and jaded to a degree, and would, I am sure, had he been
left to himself, have retired to rest before taking any further steps
in the matter. I did not know that, whilst I had been out, Dr.
Phillimore had been making extensive inquiries, and that he had
already placed under lock and key everything which had been on the
table the night before.

It appeared that he had once before been concerned in a poisoning
case. Decidedly my good fortune had been on the wane without my
knowing it. I think his previous experience had somewhat obsessed him
with the idea that poisoners were everywhere. Only in this way can I
account for the unerring ability with which he followed up every clue.

I was beginning to feel more and more uncomfortable, and when Mr.
Gascoyne and the two doctors disappeared into the library—I had not
been invited to be present—I felt much like the criminal who in a
moment of panic betrays his guilt by flight.

My wife came to me once or twice; but she was a great deal with Lady
Gascoyne, or rather stayed just within call, for Lady Gascoyne was a
proud woman, and preferred to suffer in solitude.

Whilst the consultation was proceeding in the library, I remained in
the corridor outside, controlling my agitation with really wonderful
success. As I stood in the dusk looking out through the open window,
round which climbed June roses and clematis, Esther Lane stole up to
me.

So ghostlike and silent had been her approach that I gave a cry as her
eyes met mine. On further recollection, the sound I made was a
smothered yell. It was a sound which now seems to me to have been full
of a confession of guilt.

For a moment she did not even say she was sorry she had startled me.
She was evidently too amazed at my display of nerves. I even think
that a faintly defined ghost of suspicion floated through her mind. At
any rate, the incident seemed to widen the gulf between us.

“This is terrible, is it not?” she said.

“It is terrible.”

“And but for me Lady Gascoyne would have had her child to console
her.” She covered her face with her hands.

“I do not think you ought to put it like that,” I said gently.

“The doctors say he was poisoned. It is strange, is it not?”

“It is strange,” I answered.

The sunset hour, the knowledge that the three men in the library were
hovering over an undetected crime, invested the situation with a deep
gloom. The ghostlike figure of Esther at my side, from whom remorse
and suffering had taken something of her bloom, seemed to me made for
suffering. I felt that Fate had marked her out for some terrible
experiment in sorrow; that grief had chosen her for its own, and that
I ought to have foreseen it.

I had made the cardinal error of allying myself with a soul that was
moving in a cycle of sorrows. It was curious that I should not have
detected a fact now so apparent. One should always seek the
companionship of the joyous. To walk with those who are wedded by Fate
to grief is to play with fire. It is to step within influences that
may destroy us. So much of the mystical I can infer. There is hidden
meaning in the phrase, ‘Let the dead bury their dead.’ She seemed to
be afraid of her own company, and I think sought mine out of pure
loneliness. I was too absorbed, however, in my own danger to comfort
her. What had she to fear compared to me? She had lost something which
was of purely conventional value, whilst I might be in danger of
losing the essentials, life and liberty.

“I am very unhappy,” she said, in her low, musical voice, with the
curious thrilling vibration that had given it such an appeal for me.
“I feel as if somehow I had meant nothing but sorrow and grief to this
place, as if I were of ill omen. Of course, it is presumptuous of me
to even think of myself as being of so much importance.”

“You seem to think very little of me now,” I murmured. It seemed
unchivalrous not to render her some comfort of the heart.

She was silent for a moment, and then pulled herself together.

“I am afraid I think of you too much.”

Even at that moment I was moved in my essential sex vanity, and was
prepared to play the lover if it were worth while.

“You have been very unkind lately, Esther.”

I touched her lightly with my hand. She drew away from me.

“I think you are wicked, and I know that what has been must be
expiated. That is an inevitable law.”

I shivered. There was a stern intensity in her voice despite its
music.

“Yes,” she continued, “I love you still, but I have no joy in doing
so. If by dying I could make you better, I would willingly die, but I
could never again——”

She broke off abruptly, but I knew what she had intended saying, and I
also knew that she meant it.

She moved away, and left me peering out into the dark, mechanically
trying to distinguish the features of the landscape as they became
more and more blurred by the gathering dusk.

Finally, I heard the library door open behind me, but pretended not to
have done so. I started with feigned surprise when Mr. Gascoyne
touched me on the arm. The little piece of acting was quite unneeded,
but it denoted the nervous necessity that I felt for dissimulation.
One glance at his face, even in the dusk, reassured me that, so far, I
was not in any way an object of suspicion.

“There will have to be an inquest, Israel. Phillimore is convinced
that Gascoyne was poisoned. I think his insistence on the point rather
annoys Dr. Grange.”

“I concluded that an inquest would be necessary. When is it to be
held?”

“Phillimore has wired to London for a specialist in poisons, and the
post-mortem will take place directly he arrives. It appears that
Phillimore was mixed up in the Greybridge poisoning case, and knows a
good deal about these things. Not,” he added hastily, “that there is
the least suspicion of foul play.”

Phillimore was evidently a highly unpleasant fellow, and I would
willingly have pushed him over the battlements if occasion had
offered. I made myself very civil to him, however. I was told that he
had gone into the kitchen and superintended the cooking of everything
which was sent upstairs. This had the effect of frightening all the
servants into fits, and half of them were already complaining of
imaginary internal aches and pains.

I saw the humour of the situation, notwithstanding my alarm, but the
others did not. They sat round the table with the conventional
Christian look of gloom which is considered suitable when a brother
Christian has, presumably, entered into a state of bliss.

After dinner I went and sat with my wife and Mrs. Gascoyne. They
informed me that Lady Gascoyne, thoroughly worn out, had fallen
asleep.

“I am afraid the most terrible moment of all for her will be when she
wakes up to find that it is not a dream but a reality.”

Frankly, I thought worse sorrows might have befallen a woman with
three-quarters of a million of her own, who still retained youth and
beauty, not to speak of being a dowager Countess. No, it was
impossible to feel very sorry for Lady Gascoyne. Nobody realises the
tragedies of love better than I do, but at the same time one cannot
forget that lovers for the beautiful and rich are to be found every
hour of the day. She had bought a title and a lover once. She might
conceivably do so again.

Of course, grief is always terrible, but the most terrible thing in
the whole world is poverty. I do not deny that it may be a vice to
attach the importance to wealth that I have done. I have never
concealed from myself the fact that my mind is glamoured and decadent.
Poverty, it is true, is comparative, but to have to endure that which
is relative poverty is a slow torture which has no equal.

The conversation at the dinner-table had dwelt with a mournful decency
on the probable cause of death.

“It must have been something in the food,” held Dr. Phillimore.

“If that is so, why is no one else ill?” And Dr. Grange looked as if
he had effectually crushed his colleague.

“It may have been something of which the others did not partake. I
have had all saucepans, cooking-utensils, food, dishes, and wine used
last night isolated and locked away.”

I stared at him, petrified. It was the first time I had been brought
face to face with the hard fact that the claret decanter would be
thoroughly examined. I passed a gruesome ten minutes, but managed to
maintain my composure and take my share of the conversation.

“Dr. Grange thinks the cause of death may be something quite different
from poison,” explained Dr. Phillimore, turning to the rest of the
company.

I think Mr. Gascoyne, whose instinct for character was not his strong
point, also felt that Dr. Phillimore was somewhat premature in his
conclusions, that, in fact, he was rather officious and inclined to
treat us all like children. With my special knowledge I was, of
course, able to appreciate his real value, though, even had I been a
mere spectator, I think I should have set him down at a glance as a
man of first-class brain-power.

The great specialist arrived whilst we were at dinner. He was a man of
opulent, indeed quite princely demeanour. Unlike Phillimore, whose
exterior bore a certain ruggedness, his power was concealed by an
outward courtliness that might have deceived the unwary. Personally, I
felt it at once.

He went into consultation with his brethren, and I learned afterwards
that he speedily came to the opinion that Lord Gascoyne had died of a
violent irritant poison.

All these details were kept from Lady Gascoyne as much as possible,
and it was not till after the post-mortem that she learned what had
taken place. I saw by the look of perplexity in the faces of the three
doctors that they were puzzled at what they had found. I had already
resigned myself to the fact that the poison would be found in the
bottle of claret. The wretched thing, with other food which was to be
examined, was locked up in a strong room, of which Dr. Grange held the
key. Figuratively, I was before that strong room every precious hour
that passed, wondering how it might be opened. How wretchedly I had
overreached myself! However, it was done. It was of no use to whine. I
must fight until the whole thing was decided against me.

The doctors were quite secret over what they had discovered, but I
kept Dr. Phillimore well under observation. He left the house soon
after the post-mortem, and drove off in the direction of Gaythorpe, a
town about five miles away. I knew what he had done. He had written
his telegram before leaving the house, and I read it on the
blotting-paper by means of a looking-glass. It was as I thought. The
message was a telegram to Scotland Yard asking for a detective. While
he was doing this, the poison expert was examining the food.

I tramped the battlements for one hour making up my mind as to what I
should do in case the charge should be made against me.

I did not make the mistake of dwelling on those points of the case
which were in my favour. I kept my attention fixed on those that
seemed most damning. My own guilt, viewing it as I did from the
inside, seemed easily susceptible of proof, but I had to remember that
a detective, however expert, would approach the matter from a totally
different standpoint. He was, after all, an outsider, and I must try
and put myself in his position if possible.

It took me a long time to decide my course of action should suspicion
fall upon me. I also began to grow uneasy as to whether I had left
anything in my house at Clapham which might furnish a clue to my
movements during my former operations. I was sorry I had concealed the
existence of the house.

If I were arrested the grief of Mr. Gascoyne and my wife would be
rather trying, but I had counted the cost of discovery when I
originally set out on my adventures.

Mr. Gascoyne was busily occupied in arranging for the funeral.

I was very anxious to discover whether there was any likelihood of a
posthumous heir.

I noticed that Mr. Gascoyne did not so far permit himself to be
addressed as the Earl.

The inquest was held the next day. The detective, I knew, had arrived
the night before, and was making inquiries. In the morning he was
standing in the hall as I passed towards the breakfast-room. I knew
perfectly well he was waiting to see me, and the swift glance I took
at his face convinced me that he was on the right track.

I felt a terrible shock, notwithstanding the fact that I had been
steeling myself ever since Lord Gascoyne’s death to meet such a
situation.

The specialist was the only occupant of the breakfast-room when I
entered. I had not seen him or his brethren since early the evening
before.

“Have you arrived at the cause of Lord Gascoyne’s death?” I asked.

“Poison,” he said shortly.

I started, as if immensely surprised.

“Then Dr. Phillimore was right. Something in the food, I suppose?”

He hesitated.

“We don’t quite know. We have not finished our investigation yet.”

This I knew was not true. The detective had evidently asked him, if
his own discretion had not prompted him, to hold his tongue.

The specialist volunteered no more information, and in a few minutes
my wife and Mrs. Gascoyne joined us.



Chapter XXVII

The inquest took place in the justice-room.

It was not deemed probable that it would be necessary to summon Lady
Gascoyne as witness. The evidence of the others who had been in the
room at the time when Lord Gascoyne was taken ill was considered
sufficient. The statement I had already made to the coroner’s officer
was quite simple. I declared that I had not noticed any signs of
illness on the part of Lord Gascoyne till we reached the room where
the ladies were. There had certainly been nothing to arouse anxiety
before we left the table.

The depositions of myself, Mrs. Gascoyne, my wife, and Miss Lane were
taken first, and they then passed on to the medical evidence.

Dr. Grange was the first to be examined. He stated that on reaching
the castle he found Lord Gascoyne in such a serious state that he
immediately sent for the assistance of Dr. Phillimore. The latter
seemed to think that Lord Gascoyne was suffering from poisoning, an
opinion which he had not at first shared. At the post-mortem, however,
a sufficient amount of arsenic was found in the body to have caused
death.

Dr. Phillimore’s evidence was identical, but it was easy to see that
it was he who had guided Dr. Grange’s opinion.

Finally, the expert was called, and the detective glanced at me to see
what effect his appearance would have. I am glad to say that I gave
him no satisfaction. I do not believe that I changed colour or moved a
muscle. Indeed, I believe he has had the fairness to say that he never
came across a criminal who had such complete self-control, and that it
seemed incredible that a criminal so self-possessed should not have
found means to get rid of the claret in the decanter. He afterwards
declared that he had at one time hoped to trace more than one of the
Gascoyne mysteries to me, but in that he failed.

The expert corroborated the evidence of the other doctors, and then
stated that he had made an examination of the food.

“I naturally selected the one thing which was most particular to Lord
Gascoyne,” he said, “and I began, principally for the sake of
simplicity and so as to clear the way, on the claret.”

I found myself breathing hard. It was a moment of supreme test. Many
things convinced me that there was at least some suspicion attaching
to me. The detective imagined that I was not looking at him, whereas I
was conscious of his least movement. It is indeed a pity that what
ought to be a particularly brilliant profession is left to the lower
middle classes. It accounts for the comparative lack of scandal in the
higher ranks of life, for a gentleman does not find it difficult to
hide his crimes and vices from those reared in perhaps the most obtuse
section of society.

It was also easy to see that the servant Waters had been questioned
about me, for directly the bottle of claret was mentioned he cast a
furtive glance in my direction.

“I found this bottle,” continued the specialist, “to be full of
arsenic—so full, that it would have been impossible to drink any of
the contents without succumbing to its effects. To be brief, I found
no traces of arsenic in any other bottle of claret taken from the same
bin or in any of the other food.”

“You are quite sure of that?”

“Yes. The claret was a brand of which there was barely a dozen left. I
believe Lord Gascoyne had been heard to regret that there was so
little remaining.”

After the expert’s evidence there was a pause.

Mr. Gascoyne looked terribly worried. He had evidently not imagined
that the matter was likely to become so serious and complicated.

The next witness was Gorby, the butler. He deposed to having fetched
the wine from the cellar. No one had access to the wine-cellar but
himself. He kept the keys. He had been in the family for forty years.

In reply to the coroner, he said that he himself placed the wine on
the sideboard, and that it was his duty to pour out his lordship’s
first glass before withdrawing.

No one drank claret after dinner but his lordship. Mr. Rank usually
drank one glass of port, sometimes he drank nothing, but certainly
never more than one glass.

“And on this particular evening?”

“Mr. Rank took port, sir.”

The coroner leaned forward and put the next question impressively.

“Was it possible for the arsenic to have been put into the decanter
between your placing it on the sideboard and the arrival of the
company for dinner?”

“I don’t think so, sir. I was late with some of the wine, and did not
leave the dining-room at all till the company arrived.”

“It was possible, however, for anyone to reach the wine while you were
out of the room?” persisted the coroner.

“It was possible; but the servants were very busy.”

“How many servants were there in the room besides yourself?”

“Two.”

“You yourself poured out the claret which Lord Gascoyne drank?”

“Yes, sir.”

“What did you do with the decanter?”

“As usual, I placed it in front of his lordship.”

“And then you left the room?”

“Yes.”

“And the other servants also, I suppose?”

“Yes, sir.”

There was a pause. An unaccountable whimsicality made me think of the
game which children play, and which consists in sending someone out of
the room and then hiding an article which the absent one is to find on
his return. I felt almost inclined to cry hot and cold to the coroner
as he hovered over the evidence. Not that I felt callous as to what
might be going to occur. I had enjoyed life far too much. On the other
hand, I had always reckoned the cost, and had never counted my
chickens before they were hatched.

Mr. Gascoyne crossed over to me in the interval, and said in an
undertone:

“What does it all mean?”

“I really do not know,” I said.

“Surely they are not trying to prove that his own servants poisoned
him?”

“The poison must have come from somewhere.”

“Yes; that is obvious.”

He looked at me in some surprise. I noticed his almost startled
expression, and began to analyse the remark I had made. Was it what I
should have said had I been guiltless? If it had been, Mr. Gascoyne
would not have displayed such discomfort—a vague discomfort, true, but
an evidently indefinable sensation that something was wrong. He was
from that moment uneasy about me, and yet almost unconscious of any
uneasiness.

The other servants were recalled, and declared that neither of them
had touched the wine. It would have been such an unusual thing that
the one who had done so would have been noticed by the other. The
claret was in a very peculiarly shaped flagon. By no possibility of
means could anyone have mistaken it for the claret which was offered
during the meal.

Evidence then followed as to all the wine which was handed round
during the dinner. There was champagne, said Waters, but only Mrs.
Gascoyne took any. Neither Lady Gascoyne nor Mrs. Rank drank anything.
Lord Gascoyne drank nothing but claret—the claret—at the end of the
meal. Mr. Rank drank port at the end of the meal.

The coroner persisted. I was thankful to him. His continued
examination might make one of the witnesses nervous. The sleek Waters
might contradict himself. The other two servants might relapse into a
hopeless confusion of ideas as to what they had done and what they had
seen.

It was a delusive hope. All three adhered strictly to their
statements, and finally there was another pause.

Everyone appeared to wonder what was going to happen next. I thought I
could guess the direction the proceedings would take. I was not
mistaken. The detective passed a piece of paper to the coroner. The
latter looked at it, and an expression of surprise crossed his face.

He mentioned me by name almost with a suggestion of apology, as if he
were deprecating the official side of him which insisted on a course
of action repugnant to his more social and well-bred half.

I did not look at Mr. Gascoyne, but I felt him stir in his chair
uneasily as I rose to my feet. I moved to the foot of the table where
the witnesses had stood during their examination.

“You were left alone with Lord Gascoyne after the ladies had
withdrawn?”

“That is so.”

“Can you recollect his lordship making any remark as to a curious
taste in the wine?”

“No.”

“He made no remark?”

“None at all.”

The coroner paused, and then said:

“Recall Richard Waters.”

Richard Waters stepped into my place. For one moment I felt dizzy. A
curious unreality seemed to surround the scene and its actors. I saw
things through an ecstasy which seemed to remove me afar off.
Everybody in the room bore a strange profile expression like great
gaunt marionettes. After a few minutes the sensation passed, and I
felt myself growing abnormally tense and keen; in fact, the acuteness
of intelligence which I felt was in proportion to the recession from
realities which had just possessed me. It had been an unconscious
recoil, but my perception advanced with greater force because of it.

“You came into the room when Lord Gascoyne and Mr. Rank were alone, I
believe, to tell his lordship that Colonel Markham wished to see him
in the library?”

“Yes, sir.”

“You then returned to the dining-room?”

“Yes, sir.”

“What for?”

“His lordship told me to bring him his eye-glasses, which he had left
on the table.”

“What did you see?”

“Mr. Rank had the decanter of claret in his hand.”

“What did you do?”

“I thought he had mistaken the decanter of claret for port, and I took
it from him and helped him to port.”

“But you say that the claret and port were in two totally different
decanters. The claret was in a flagon?”

“Yes, sir.”

The port decanter and the flagon were here produced. No one could have
imagined that the claret flagon held port; at least, so I thought, but
it may have been my guilty conscience.

The coroner continued his examination.

“Please be very careful in your answers.”

“Yes, sir.”

“When you took the flagon from Mr. Rank, where was the stopper?”

“On the table.”

“You are quite sure?”

“Quite.”

“Why are you so positive?”

“I cannot say, but I am quite sure.”

“That will do.”

The coroner looked perplexed. The jurymen gazed at him as if for
inspiration. The detective made no sign.

The coroner rose and announced that the inquiry was adjourned.

I realised the grim meaning of his laconic announcement.

It was apparent to everyone that the case had assumed an ugly
complexion, and that there was a so far unspoken suspicion of foul
play in men’s minds. Such a suspicion was not likely to remain
unexpressed very long, and it soon rose from a whisper to a crescendo
of excitement. Lord Gascoyne had been murdered, so everyone said, and
the London papers that came down by the evening train already had the
announcement in large letters. They hinted at a mystery, and declared
that sensational developments might be expected at the adjourned
inquest.

Mr. Gascoyne was in a state of the greatest nervous agitation. He took
every care, however, that no suspicion of the dark things which were
being said should reach any of the women, and the papers were
carefully kept out of their way.

Worried as he was, I do not think that he in any way anticipated the
blow which was about to fall.

Edith asked me one or two questions after the inquest as to what had
taken place, but it was quite evident that she had not the least
suspicion of what had occurred.

Mrs. Gascoyne, on the other hand, who had lived in the world, and had
been brought up in a commercial family, had her eyes fairly wide open.
I could see when we met at dinner that she was very uneasy.

It was a dismal meal. Lady Gascoyne did not, of course, appear. My
wife was sad and preoccupied. Mrs. Gascoyne, with, I am sure, a full
premonition of impending disaster, strove to be cheerful, but to
little purpose. Mr. Gascoyne hardly spoke a word. When we were left
alone he drew his chair nearer to me, evidently prepared for a long
conversation.

It would have been amusing, had the subject not possessed such grim
significance for me, to notice how very deprecatingly the servants
offered us wine.

The castle cellar itself had, of course, been placed under lock and
key, and the detective seemed to have disappeared from the premises.

“Israel,” said Mr. Gascoyne seriously, “if poison was found in that
bottle, someone must have put it there.”

“That seems very obvious.”

“I could have understood it had there only been a very little arsenic
in the bottle, but that it should have contained the quantity it did
is amazing.”

Why Mr. Gascoyne should have understood it better had there not been
so much arsenic in the bottle was not very apparent, but he was in the
sort of mood in which people are apt to talk nonsense.

“Have you the least suspicion as to who might have put the poison in
the bottle, Israel?”

He looked at me furtively.

“They might say that it was I, sir.”

I fancy that he gave almost a sigh of relief. He would never have
dared to make such a suggestion himself, and I could see that he was
thankful to me for giving him an opening.

“To tell you the truth, Israel, it has struck me that in the absence
of anyone else being open to suspicion they might hint at such an
absurdity.”

I laughed, a highly successful laugh.

“You see, sir, in my case there is motive.”

“I am almost afraid, Israel, that people may say unpleasant things.
Reading the bare evidence, they may be tempted to come to ridiculous
conclusions.”

I saw that it was time to affect a serious view of the matter. I kept
a close watch on my tone of voice, however, and was most careful as to
the light and shade of any expressions I used.

“You don’t mean to say, sir, that you seriously think anybody would
connect me with the crime?”

“Seriously, no; but I think irresponsible gossip might make things
very unpleasant.”

“It certainly would be unpleasant.”

“You are my heir, Israel. Failing me, the title passes on to the
branch of Lord George Gascoyne, whose heir you are through your
mother.”

“Exactly, sir; as I said, in my case there is motive.” I looked a
little grave, and continued slowly:

“Someone must have put the poison in the bottle.” I was deliberately
allowing my gravity to increase in order to emphasise my growing
apprehension.

“I notice the detective has left the house,” I said.

“Detective!” echoed Mr. Gascoyne in amazement.

“Surely, sir, you knew that there was a detective in the house?”

“My dear Israel, I knew nothing of the kind.”

He thought for a moment, and then added: “I think I ought to have been
told.”

“I thought you knew, sir.”

“Are you sure it was a detective?”

“Quite sure.”

But even as I spoke I remembered that I only had my own deductions to
guide me. No one had told me he was a detective. I searched swiftly in
my brain for some excuse, but could think of none.

“How did you know he was a detective?”

“I heard him questioning one of the servants.”

“Which servant?”

“Waters.”

“What about?”

“I did not quite catch what he said, but it was quite easy to see what
he was.”

“He may have been gathering evidence for the inquest.”

“That is what I suggest.”

“Oh! I beg your pardon.”

He was evidently a little puzzled.

The next day Lord Gascoyne was buried. It was a beautiful sunlit
morning, and as we crossed the courtyard following the coffin in
procession I glanced up towards the windows of Lady Gascoyne’s
apartment. I could see a white hand slightly drawing apart the closed
curtains. I was sorry for her, but as matters were going I was a good
deal more sorry for myself.

The affair had already attained the dignity of a first-class mystery
in the London press, and as the victim was a Lord the sensation was
twice what it would otherwise have been.

Most of them frankly admitted that as far as they knew there was no
clue. But one halfpenny daily with an enormous circulation, whose
consistent unveracity seemed a matter of supreme indifference to its
readers, declared that there was a clue, and stated that someone had
come forward to show that Lord Gascoyne had been in the habit of
purchasing arsenic, that he was a confirmed arsenic eater, and that
everything he ate was impregnated with it.

It was very unpleasant to have the searchlight of the entire press
turned on the case so soon. It would put Scotland Yard on its mettle,
and detective forces are apt to strain matters somewhat when their
credit is publicly involved.

That evening I was walking up and down the terrace smoking a cigar
with no very comfortable feelings, when I caught sight of the gleam of
a white dress in the shadow of the battlements some way off. I guessed
at once who it was. Esther Lane was watching me.

Why was she doing so? Was it possible that some suspicion of the truth
had entered her brain? It dawned on me that, creature of instinct as
she was, she might have arrived at the truth by the clear light of
intuition.

I went swiftly towards her.

There was no time for her to evade me, but she shrank back into the
shadow as I approached her.

“Why are you watching me?” I said as gently as I could, putting out my
hands nervously.

She shrank back, thrusting me from her.

“Don’t touch me. Don’t touch me.”

Her voice was low, tense with a latent hysteria, which must have
caused her an immense effort to control.

“Why are you watching me?” I asked again.

She looked at me silently, the terror in her eyes growing.

She began to give me a strangely uneasy feeling.

“Oh, it’s horrible, horrible,” she murmured, and then stole away,
moving along the parapet like a ghost.

I was afraid of her, and of what she might do. She was evidently
losing her self-control fast. That she had guessed the truth was
obvious.

I went towards her rooms. They were dark. Perhaps she was still
wandering on the battlements with her unquiet thoughts.

I found my wife sitting up when I returned. She had been with Lady
Gascoyne.

“Such an utter loneliness, Israel. It is terrible. She seems to have
lost all interest in life. I have never seen such desolation.”

People have a way of being superlative when talking of those in grief.
I, too, was very sorry for Lady Gascoyne, but though she had no
children, she had everything else in the world to console her.

I comforted my wife and took her in my arms, wondering curiously
whether this would be the last night we should spend together, which,
indeed, it turned out to be.

The next day the inquest was resumed. None of the ladies of the castle
were present. Mr. Gascoyne—or Lord Gascoyne, as he was now
called—looked haggard and worn, and, as I thought, avoided my eye. His
manner, however, was extraordinarily kindly.

The servants were recalled and closely re-examined. They were still
quite consistent.

The bottle of claret had been opened and decanted by Waters. He had
placed it on the sideboard. No one else had touched it. The servants
were all devoted to their master. There was not the slightest reason
or motive for foul play on their part.

I noticed the detective sitting with the representatives of the county
police, the chief constable himself being present. I smiled grimly as
I surveyed all the materials for a very dramatic arrest.

The coroner then called me.

“After the ladies had withdrawn from the dinner-table on the evening
in question you were left alone with Lord Gascoyne?”

“That is so.”

“He was called out of the room and a servant entered whilst he was
away?”

“Yes.”

“Who declares that you had in your hand the claret decanter from which
Lord Gascoyne had been drinking.”

“I don’t remember. The servant took the decanter from me and poured
out some port.”

It was just as well I admitted this, for the servant’s statement
received curious corroboration.

“That will do.”

The next two witnesses were disconcerting. They were the chemist from
whom I had bought the arsenic and his assistant. I was confronted with
every proof of my folly.

I shall never forget the awful grayness which came over Lord
Gascoyne’s face when these witnesses gave their evidence. I noticed
that when they had finished everyone avoided looking at me. They
seemed afraid. The case appeared so simple that at first it also
appeared incredible. Those around hardly grasped it.

The coroner asked me if I would like to explain why I had bought the
arsenic.

Perhaps I made a mistake in saying that I used it as a tonic.

“Had I been in the habit of doing so?” was the next question.

“Yes, I had done so before.”

“Have you ever bought arsenic from that chemist before?”

“No.”

Here the family lawyer interposed, advising me to be very careful of
my answers. I was not obliged to reply to anything which might
incriminate me.

There was nothing more to be done. Towards the end of the inquest the
chief constable crossed to my side, and, sitting down in quite a
friendly manner, asked me to accompany him after the inquest into the
next room.

The jury, evidently taking into consideration the fact that I was the
next heir, that I had arsenic in my possession, that there was every
motive, and that I was the only person who could have done it,
returned a verdict of ‘Wilful murder’ against me. In my own eyes I
stood convicted as the veriest bungler who ever danced at the end of a
few yards of rope.

Lord Gascoyne was inexpressibly horrified, and there was a something
in his face which I had not seen before. Was it suspicion? Perhaps he
was thinking of the occasion when he learned that I was in the
Lowhaven hotel at the time of his son’s death. Truly I had made some
inexcusable mistakes.

If nothing succeeds like success, it is also true that nothing fails
like failure.

I found it somewhat difficult to play a sentimental role which should
be convincing. I felt that I ought to take a dramatic farewell of my
wife. Scenes of this sort, however, were distasteful to me. I asked
Lord Gascoyne to go and explain the situation to her, and when she
arrived I received her with a manner which entirely forbade any
outward expression of anguish. To do her justice, she was not the kind
of woman who was likely to make a scene. She displayed the most
perfect self-control, although I could see that she was suffering
acutely. It came as a terrible blow to her. No suspicion, I am sure,
of the possibility of such a thing had before entered her mind. I
don’t think anybody really thought me guilty, which was, to say the
least of it, peculiar, for it seemed to me as though the evidence were
plain enough. From his manner the chief constable might have been
driving me over to his place to stay for a day or two, and the first
intimation I received of the unpleasant reality of the situation was
the passing under the great gates of the county prison and the
knowledge that for the future I was not free to go where I liked.



Chapter XXVIII

I suppose I must be thoroughly selfish, for at this moment of extreme
depression and misery I was thinking chiefly of myself. Of course, I
am curiously constituted, quite artificial from the world’s point of
view. I cannot say that I was a victim to the agony and woe which I
believed would have been the lot of most people in my condition.

I, who had staked so much to win what I coveted, might have been
expected to suffer tortures at the reflection of what I had lost. I
had always thought that the most terrible thing about shame and
imprisonment must be the complete triumph of those who have hated
one—the triumph of the ‘I told you so.’ This and the irrevocable loss
of earthly pleasures and the binding hand and foot as if one had no
passions or emotions, were the things I had always dreaded. My
consolation was that my failure could not be a commonplace one.
Ordinary criminals might wear out their lives in captivity and lose
their identity through long years of vile slavery, but the law, stupid
and sordid as it is, had at least a due sense of the dignity of my
crime, and would meet a defiance like mine with the dignified retort
of death. Sordid crimes must meet with sordid rewards. Death is never
sordid, and it shuts out the derision of a virtuous world.

I was caged, and through my own folly. A little patience and ordinary
care would have saved me. To have failed after such triumphs, and to
have failed where failure was irretrievable, was maddening. I hated
myself more than a converted sinner could have done. It was all quite
dreadful. A miserable fiasco, with a tragedy as the result. I turned
hot and cold whenever I thought of it—I mean the fiasco, not the
tragedy. I felt like an actor who has mangled his part and knows it.
The only thing to do was to make the end as flamboyant as possible.
There was strong temptation to proclaim my triumphs forthwith. I was
certain that for all hope there could be of retrieving the position I
might do so. I had, however, thrown away too many cards. One never
knows how time, even of the briefest, will deal with facts, so I
determined to be wary. I would fight every inch of the ground. It
would, at any rate, be an amusement till the end, and my memoirs would
keep my fame alive after death. One does not sin greatly to be
forgotten, and, after all, the great sinners of history have had their
share of posterity, and without the aid of public monuments. The world
is always more curious to hear about vice than virtue.

For the first few days after my arrest I was a prey to savage rage,
and found it difficult to reduce myself to that condition of mind in
which a fighter who wants to make the best of things should be.

The first visit I received was from Lord Gascoyne. I was sorry for
him. He looked ghastly, and avoided my eye. I was sure now that
suspicion had done its work. Yet I knew he was blaming himself for
even wondering how it came about that I was in the hotel when his son
was poisoned. He had believed in me so thoroughly that he was trying
to drive off the horrid thoughts that would pursue him. My wife’s
belief in me did not waver. Women like her do not lightly throw down
the idols they have once set up. She loved me still, and she was
steadfast. I wondered what Sibella and Esther were thinking. I was
chiefly sorry for Sibella. It may have been because in my heart of
hearts I loved her best. I knew how helpless she would feel. She would
be obliged to conceal her grief, and she was the sort of woman to whom
repression might mean hysteria. She had nothing to hold on to. The
morbid horror of the whole thing would terrify her. I found it better
for my peace of mind not to think of her.

I had caught sight of Esther for one moment before I left Hammerton.
No one else saw her, but I was sure that she would be about somewhere.
She was in the woods as I drove past. Her face was not pleasant to
look upon. It was like the wraith of a memory, the pitiful phantom of
a disembodied soul. It seemed to me as I sat alone during the quiet
summer evenings, with the immense stillness of the prison around me,
that sometimes her presence passed into my cell and made it curiously
uncanny. I felt as if the arms of her soul had reached as far as my
prison home in her agony, and once I even thought I heard her speak to
me in a still, small voice.

I am no disbeliever in the unseen world, but curiously enough it has
never had any terrors for me. Its concreteness has always seemed to me
a difference in kind; a plane on which the idea is shaped with more
fluidity; that is all.

I wondered if she would confess our relations. She had, I am sure, a
high sense of honour, and her loyalty would probably stand any test.
Still, hers was a subtle mind, and might, its white light having once
been split, display a variety of tones and colours.

I do not think Lord Gascoyne had confided his suspicions to his wife,
for I received from her nothing but the kindest and most encouraging
of letters.

So I lay in gaol and waited, and the day for my examination came. The
police-court where I appeared was packed. The county turned up in
force; they were the same people who would have fawned on me had I
succeeded in my object. Perhaps it is unworthy of an artist to suggest
so much bitterness as lies in the word fawn. I had been taken by Fate
on my own terms, and if I had failed, it was not for me to show a
bitter spirit; in fact, it was illogical and small. I had played for
their admiration and, having failed, obtained instead their derision.

My wife was in court the first day, and spoke to me in such a way as
to impress upon the world her absolute confidence. I had no wish,
however, to add to her sorrow, and I told her it would make me happier
if she remained away.

The case was gone into most exhaustively, and, despite the fact that
my lawyer declared that there was absolutely nothing on which to go to
a jury, I was committed for trial.

I am pleased to say that the newspapers were unanimous in noticing my
absolute calm of demeanour.



Chapter XXIX

A magistrate’s court is not a dignified place, and I had longed for
its sordid littleness to have an end that I might emerge on to a
larger platform.

I did so sooner than I expected. Lord Gascoyne, whose heart had never
been strong, succumbed under the strain and anxiety of the whole
affair, and I awoke one morning in prison to find the dream of my life
realised. I was Earl Gascoyne. My child, whether boy or girl, would be
the next heir, and whatever happened, I had achieved my purpose.

It had one unlooked-for result. I immediately claimed my right to be
tried by my peers.

Judging from the newspapers, the claim came upon the public as
something of a shock. In the Radical press there was an outcry for the
abolition of such an antiquated custom. They were, however, brought
face to face with a law of the land which so long as it stands is
good.

This prospect almost reconciled me to my position. I saw myself, a
picturesque figure, seated on a daïs, with my fellow-peers in their
robes before me. Yes, I had just the appearance to carry off such a
situation.

I was sure of female sympathy. I was barely twenty-six, and looked
younger. I should certainly have obtained something for my trouble.

The question as to whether I was likely to get a fairer trial from my
peers did not weigh with me. I would not for a certain acquittal have
foregone the scene in the House of Lords.

As far as I knew, the last peer to be tried on a charge of murder was
the celebrated Earl Ferrers. I read everything to do with this trial
with assiduity. I noticed that, instead of being relegated to the
common gaol, he had been confined in his own house. I regretted to
discover that this was not a right, or if it were I could not find
anything bearing on the subject.

It would have been eminently satisfactory to go under escort from Park
Lane to the House of Lords every day. As a matter of fact, I supposed
I should have to be taken to and fro, or perhaps I should be lodged in
some apartment in the precincts of Westminster Palace. The prospect
teemed with interest, and was not a little comic. The papers, which
had, of course, talked of nothing but my case for weeks, became trebly
excited. The probable ceremonial was discussed at length by all of
them. Articles by celebrated lawyers, letters from antiquaries,
suggestions from all sides, filled up their columns and tided them
over the dull weeks in a way which ought to have made them highly
grateful to me.

I was myself in doubt for a short period as to whether my never having
taken my seat or the oath would prevent my claiming my privilege. I
believe everyone was too anxious to see the fun to press any debatable
point. Of course, at the end of all this excitement loomed a not
improbable and most unpleasant climax, but I was accustoming myself to
think less and less of it every day.

I read the State Trials assiduously, for they teemed with interest for
me.

The fact that I was not to be tried with the farce of a jury was a
great comfort to me. If there is one thing more ridiculous than
another in our judicial system, it is the fiction that when a
gentleman has been tried before a dozen petty tradesmen he has been
tried by his peers. If a peer were tried by a dozen gentlemen of
ordinarily good standing and repute, he would be tried by his peers,
but to try a gentleman before a dozen men who can have no knowledge of
the conditions under which he has lived is simply absurd. Murder
trials, the results of which with our system of capital punishment are
irrevocable, should be tried by three judges whose verdict should be
unanimous, and the trial should always take place in another part of
the country from that in which the crime has been committed.

My perceptions became abnormally keen on matters of legal procedure. I
sometimes found myself, when reflecting on such matters, starting with
the assumption that I was innocent. It was amazing how completely I
could follow a line of argument having my innocence for its basis.

It was decided that I should be taken to the House of Lords the night
before the trial and lodged in the precincts, under a strict guard,
till its conclusion.

I was uncertain until the last moment whether I should have the escort
of military, or mounted police. As a matter of fact, I was honoured
with neither, but was hemmed in by detectives.

I did not doubt but that I should have a perfectly fair trial. I can
imagine no tribunal where a man is likely to receive more impartial
treatment.

I read all the papers, and was disturbed to notice that a suspicion
gradually manifested itself as to the real truth. It began to be
remembered how speedily the members of the family which stood between
me and the title had disappeared, and under what tragic circumstances.

I had always made a point of not having my photograph taken.
Unfortunately, the police did this for me, and the proprietor of the
hotel at which young Gascoyne Gascoyne had stayed when he was supposed
to have poisoned himself recognised me at once. It was flattering as a
tribute to my individuality, but inconvenient. I was for at once
admitting that I had been at the hotel at the time, but my lawyers
would not hear of it. Every inch of the ground, they declared, must be
fought. They were a most able firm, and, realising that I was an
advertisement such as they could never hope for again, they nursed the
case—which in the first place was strong and healthy enough to have
satisfied any lawyers—with tender solicitude.

I said that I had mentioned the fact to Mr. Gascoyne, as he then was,
and that he might have told his wife. I asked if this would be
accepted in evidence. They scouted the idea, however, of its being
used, so I forbore to press the question further. The chances that Mr.
Gascoyne had told his wife were extremely remote.

Having tracked me to the hotel at Lowhaven, the police were somewhat
at a loss. They utterly failed to establish the fact that I had any
poison in my possession at that time. They then threw themselves with
ardour into the details of Ughtred Gascoyne’s death. Here, again,
although it was possible to show that I was not infrequently at his
flat late at night, their most strenuous efforts could not prove that
I was there on the night on which the fire had taken place.

I was sure that suspicion about this began to creep into my wife’s
mind. Perhaps she had learned that the Parsons were fictitious
individuals. It may also have struck her that I must have passed the
road where her brother was found dead, earlier on the same evening.
These two facts, taken together with my being in the same hotel with
young Gascoyne when he died, and as much evidence as could be raked up
against me in connection with Ughtred Gascoyne’s death, must have
forged a chain of implication which could not but shake the most
serene confidence. Not that I had the least fear of her acting in a
hostile manner. She could not have done anything had she wished to;
besides, she belonged to that class of woman who, possessing most of
the virtues, would never drag her husband’s name in the dust. Her
conscience might—had she been questioned—have triumphed, but that she
would speak out of her own free will I did not believe.

As the day of the trial drew nearer and nearer without any new charge
my confidence rose. I suppose this optimism lies at the back of every
prisoner’s mind. The possibility of an acquittal probably never
disappears till the foreman of the jury delivers the terrible word
guilty, a word which has a leaden sound complementary to the
deadliness of its meaning.

My wife came to see me the day before the trial, and though she strove
hard against the awful horror that I could see was in her mind, the
strain was at last telling on her. She was taken away in a dead faint.
I was sorry for her. I knew it was the last thing she would have
wished should happen. My own danger had driven all three women out of
my mind, and it was a psychological point which interested me
extremely. I had loved them so fervently; and I could love fervently,
even if not on the highest level. My own position, however, was so
enormously important in my eyes that they were quite dwarfed. I could
not rouse myself to any degree of emotion over their sufferings. It
was not the idea of losing them that predominated in my mind, nor the
idea of dwelling in their memory as a thing for pity, the victim of a
terrible and gloomy death.

I regret to say that my departure for London, considered as a
spectacle, was a failure.

I left the county prison in an ordinary carriage, and was put into a
special train which drew up at a crossing in the depths of the
country. I remember as I passed from the carriage to the railway-train
casting my eye over a mellow, moonlit landscape, and wondering where I
should be when they cut the corn. To one of my temperament it was a
beautiful world I was perhaps leaving, and it was a dismal reflection
that I might not share in the next year’s harvest of pleasant things.

The train reached London at an early hour of the morning, and such
perfect arrangements had been made that the few porters about hardly
realised who it was who was hurried into a private carriage and driven
off.

Passing through the streets as dawn was breaking, I could see on the
advertisement boards outside small newspaper shops the soiled posters
of the evening papers. They bore large headlines with: “Trial of Lord
Gascoyne,” “Latest Arrangements,” etc., etc. There was not a paper
which had not displayed it more prominently than any other item of
news. This was gratifying. The carriage drew up at the peers’ entrance
to the House of Lords, for such was my privilege, and in a few minutes
I had full assurance that I was receiving the hospitality of
gentlemen. I was ushered into two rooms which had been set apart for
me, and in one of which was laid a comfortable and substantial
breakfast. To this I did full justice. Arrangements had been so made
that I was practically alone in the room, although, of course, I was
being very carefully watched. It was exceedingly comforting to feel
that if they were going to hang me, they were going to do it with tact
and breeding.

Parliament being in session, my trial would not take place before the
Court of the Lord High Steward. I was glad, for that would have been
comparatively a very small affair.

It may be as well to state that the House of Lords is a Court of
Justice, of which all Peers of Parliament are judges, and the Lord
High Steward the President. It differs from an ordinary court of law,
inasmuch as all the peers taking part in the trial are judges both of
the law and of the facts.

At a very early hour I could hear a great deal of bustling and passing
to and fro. I lay down on my bed, however, and had a most refreshing
sleep. On awaking I was told that my lawyers wished to see me.

I had an interview with them lasting about an hour. They were both
mightily important and very excited. The atmosphere of the place had
evidently given them the idea that they were historical individuals,
and I fancy that they looked upon me as if I had been accused of High
Treason, and, in fact, treated me as quite a great personage.

So intense had been the excitement aroused, and so general was the
interest displayed, that it had been decided to hold the trial in the
roomier accommodation of Westminster Hall. I knew from what my counsel
had told me that the peers had begun to assemble at ten o’clock. It
was fully eleven, however, before I was summoned.

Although I was guarded to a certain extent by the usual officers of
the law, I was nominally in charge of the yeoman usher of the Black
Rod, and in his custody I was brought to the Bar.

Just before I entered a note was put into my hands which I was allowed
to read. It was from Esther Lane, and ran:

  “Love is always difficult to bear, because of its madness, which
  overthrows, and its vision, which distorts. Pleasant we deem the
  kisses of men, though they sting, but the stings of suffering are
  the kisses of God, and they burn like fire.”

Womanlike, though she was thinking of me, she was thinking somewhat
more of herself.

It was a brilliant scene which I emerged upon, though perhaps somewhat
lacking in the magnificence that would have attended it had it taken
place a century earlier.

The Lord High Steward, as President, was seated in front of a throne,
and on either side of him were the peers, in their robes, and wearing
their orders. In front of the President was a raised daïs, on which
was placed an armchair, and by the side of which was a table.

Near this daïs were tables at which were seated my counsel and other
legal advisers. There was a gallery at one side, in which were seated
the peeresses, and another gallery at the other side, in which were a
number of Ambassadors, foreign royalties and noblemen, semi-resident
in England. The difference between such a trial conducted amid a feast
of colour and variety from what it must have been had it been
conducted at the Old Bailey with its gloom and almost squalid lack of
breadth was startling to think upon.

I had thoroughly studied the effect of my entrance. I knew that the
scarlet of my peer’s robes formed an absolute tone contrast to my
Jewish appearance, and I was conscious of making a marked effect on
the women present.

As an artist, I had suffered grievously in my own estimation by the
blunders I had made in removing Lord Gascoyne, and I was determined
that henceforward, whatever happened, I would not do anything which
could mar the beauty and interest of the situation.

I waited at the foot of the daïs while Norroy, King-at-Arms, called
‘Oyez, Oyez.’ The letters patent constituting a Lord High Steward were
then read.

Norroy, and the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, then did their
reverences kneeling, and presented the White Staff jointly to the Lord
High Steward, who, receiving it, immediately delivered it to the
Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod on his right hand. The Purse-Bearer,
holding the purse, was on his left.

All these officials in their archaic costumes produced a most
picturesque effect. The composition was seen in a sort of half-light,
mellowing its garishness and the primary tones of official uniform.
Through the windows, which had been veiled to keep out the glare of a
brilliant summer sun, a golden light fell here and there, just
sufficient to edge the scene with a gilded splendour.

The writ of certiorari for removing the indictment before the King in
Parliament was then read. I will not reproduce this legal document,
but it is sufficient to say that it charged me with the sole offence
of poisoning Lord Gascoyne. I already saw in the faces of those around
me that they believed what the press had daily insinuated, viz., that
I was a wholesale murderer. Herein lay a great peculiarity and paradox
of justice. It would not have been permissible to even hint in a court
of law that there was a breath of suspicion attached to me in regard
to the deaths of the other Gascoynes; it struck me, however, that it
would have been excellent proof as to my innocence had it been argued
that so clever a criminal as the alleged murderer of these others had
been, would never have blundered so grossly over the murder of Lord
Gascoyne.

As I stood and listened to these preliminaries I was being scrutinised
by everyone in the Hall. The Lords were freed from the discomfort of
trying one who had been born and bred among them. There were no
recollections of Eton and Oxford to spoil the abstract drama of the
occasion. I was to the great majority a stranger, and to the rest a
mere acquaintance. Of course, I was connected with some of those
present, but in so distant a degree that it hardly amounted to
anything, and for all practical purposes I stood there a stranger.
This must undoubtedly have been a relief to them, as curiosity could
be given full play.

The clerk of the Parliaments then directed the Sergeant-at-Arms to
make proclamation for Black Rod to bring his prisoner within the Bar.

I was led to the chair on the daïs which was technically considered
within the Bar. The daïs had been provided so that I might have, as
was only fair, a commanding position, and see and hear all that was
going on. I remembered to have seen an old print of Charles I. being
tried, and the recollection of it came back to me very vividly, except
that in place of the motley crew of fanatics and bullies who
constituted themselves his judges I had an assembly of gentlemen,
reinforced by English judges, and in place of Bawling Bradshaw, I had
a Lord Chancellor who was one of the most cultured men of his day.

Having arrived on the daïs, I did due reverence to the court with all
the dignity imaginable. I fancy the impression was good, and must at
any rate have convinced the peers present, that even if I were unknown
to them they had not been summoned to try a vulgarian under the most
select form known to English law.

The Clerk of the Parliaments then again read the indictment and asked:

“How say you, my lord, are you guilty of the felony whereof you stand
indicted or are you not guilty?”

I pleaded not guilty, and the trial proceeded.

I have come to the conclusion that the case was a curiously simple
one, although it entirely depended on circumstantial evidence. The
principal witnesses were the chemist, and the two servants. It was a
descent from the sublime to the ridiculous when these humble folk
stepped into the box, and I shall never forget—by the way, under the
circumstances not a prolonged limit of memory—the bewhiskered and
perspiring little chemist gazing round on the august assemblage before
which he was appearing, evidently not at all certain that he might not
be ordered out to instant execution. I almost thought that he would
become delirious and be unable to give his evidence, but he pulled
himself together, and by the time he left the box was evidently under
the impression that he was one of us. Indeed, he replied in quite a
chatty way to the Lord High Steward when asked a question by that
exalted functionary.

The opening of the prosecution struck me as being vindictive, but it
is possible that the prisoner is not a good judge of such a point.

It was lunch-time before the preliminary law questions had been
disposed of and the opening speech of the prosecution made. I was led
out by a side door before anyone else moved. When I returned the court
was already assembled. The remainder of the day was spent in examining
the witnesses. There could be no doubt that I had bought arsenic, for
I was recognised by both the chemist and his assistant. Not till I
heard the story unfolded in court did I realise how very crudely I had
acted. The examination of the witnesses was proceeding when the court
rose. I spent the evening looking out on the river with some very
melancholy reflections on the advantages of liberty. The dark barges,
looking like gigantic pachyderms, floated silently past, with their
solitary lights shining dimly. The river reflected the city lights in
innumerable little splashes of flame, which danced and glimmered with
the restless waters. On the far bank I could see figures passing to
and fro. In the solitary fastness of a gaol it had been easy to
realise the fact of being a prisoner, but in a room which bore no
resemblance in any way to a cell, it was exceedingly difficult.
Besides, there was the open door, and I almost forgot the watchers in
the passage. The windows had been barred temporarily. Otherwise there
was an air of comfort, even of luxury, about the room.

I received a long letter from my wife which did extraordinary credit
to her sense of justice and her self-control. It was written as if
with the utmost belief in my innocence, and evidently she had striven
to keep her mind in such an attitude. I answered her at once, not
abating any apparent affection, and saying that between us two it was
unnecessary to reiterate my innocence, as I knew her trust in me to be
absolute.

Towards the end of the letter I worked myself into quite a fervour of
sublime confidence that no injustice would be done, and that an unseen
Providence was watching over me.

Then I read Lord Beaconsfield’s _Vivian Grey_ till I went to bed. I
slept well, all things considered. I hoped to sleep better when the
verdict was given, whichever way the case might be decided.

The next morning I awoke early, and as the law took so little account
of individual psychology as to imagine that I might cut my throat, I
was obliged to send out for a barber.

The youth who performed the operation was a pleasant young man, whose
excitement was so painful that I warned him it was High Treason to cut
the throat of a peer of the realm when he was being tried for his
life.

I asked him what his own opinion was as to my guilt.

The question took him so entirely by surprise that he sprang away from
me fully a yard.

“Come,” I said. “What do people say?”

He flushed and was silent.

“So people think I am guilty, do they?”

“Some do, your grace.”

“That means that most do. Now, does anyone believe in my innocence?”

“Oh yes, my lord, of course, some.”

“I see; very few people believe in my innocence. Who are those that
do?”

He smiled. “I think the women do, my lord.”

This was satisfactory. I could not have had more practical support.

He told me further that there was a vast crowd outside in Westminster
Yard.

I advised him to make his way at once to a newspaper office, and sell
them a description of his interview with me. I warned him, however,
that he must exaggerate if he wished to be believed, and I gave him
full permission to invent any details of the occurrence which he might
think useful.

The Hall was perhaps even more crowded than it had been the day
before. This showed a proper increase of interest.

The cross-examinations were masterly, especially when it was
considered how simple the evidence of the bare half-dozen witnesses
was.

My counsel managed to throw doubt on the fact of my having been the
man who bought the poison. This doubt, it is true, counsel for the
prosecution soon swept aside, but I could not help admiring the
dexterity with which my counsel threw a veil of uncertainty over what,
when stated by the prosecution, had seemed facts beyond dispute.

The contention of the prosecution was very simple. It was to nobody’s
interest but mine and Mr. Gascoyne’s that Lord Gascoyne should die,
and whilst Mr. Gascoyne was in London, the prisoner was constantly in
Lord Gascoyne’s company. Further, it was pointed out that I was the
only person left alone with the bottle of claret, and that the moment
I was so left alone was the only one during which the wine could have
been poisoned. I was further proved to have been in possession of
arsenic for which I could not account. It had been suggested that the
poison might have been in the cup of tea which Lord Gascoyne had
drunk, but there was nothing to support this view. It was regrettable
that this cup had been removed, and washed before it had been
examined. Lord Gascoyne, however, was taken ill almost immediately
after he had drunk the tea. This made the insinuation that it was
poisoned unlikely, as arsenic had, as far as could be proved, never
acted instantaneously. My counsel, in the course of his address, made
an earnest appeal that everything alien to the case which had been
circulated, he could only say in a most scandalous manner, in certain
organs of the press, should be put out of mind. He insinuated that in
this respect he felt a greater confidence in their lordships than he
would have done in an ordinary jury.

He concluded by the usual passionate appeal for the benefit of any
doubt which might linger in their minds.

The Lord High Steward summed up the evidence, and a very brief
summing-up it was. Then their lordships retired, and after three
hours’ deliberation I was brought back into court.

I knew directly I returned what the verdict was, for in all faces
there was the same look of intense gravity. Over the entire assembly
there lay an almost oppressive silence. I noticed that people avoided
looking at me, as if it were an intrusion to witness the emotions of
any human being at such a moment.

After the verdict was given there passed across the whole place a sort
of sigh, followed by a terrible hush.

I stood up and heard the sentence, and then, with the most profound
reverence to the entire court, withdrew, satisfied that I could not be
accused of having behaved otherwise than with a calmness and dignity
befitting the privilege of belonging to such an assembly.



Chapter XXX

I suppose the feelings of a human being awaiting extinction on a near
date fixed by the law must vary according to temperament. In this, as
in most things, ignorance has its advantages. A chaplain working on a
mind incapable of the intellectual effort of scepticism might send a
criminal to the scaffold with a distinct feeling that in spite of its
other disadvantages, murder plus hanging plus repentance was a short
cut to eternal bliss—a view of the question which would no doubt shock
the reverend gentleman who had inadvertently been a most effective
advocate of murder.

Capital punishment is, of course, a profoundly unphilosophical thing.
Only a very ill-informed person would uphold it as a deterrent, and if
not a deterrent its only excuse is the selfish one of putting someone
out of the way whom it cannot control without expense and trouble.
This principle, however, is a very awkward one, and would, stated in
its crudest form, astonish some people who mechanically support it.

As soon as I was back—I cannot say comfortably back—in prison, and in
the condemned cell, I made up my mind to concentrate myself on a human
document which should be a record of my career—a document to be
written with as little display of feeling as possible, a statement of
facts with well-bred calm and restraint.

I knew, of course, that it must be incomplete. No one has ever told
the truth about himself. I, for one, dislike the yawning gaps in the
confessions of Rousseau. Either a man’s confessions should have
something in them which Rousseau’s have not, or they are not very much
worth confessing. A few obvious sexual trivialities are not of very
great interest when all human beings guess what has been kept back.
Dr. Johnson, when told that the unfortunate Dr. Dodd was devoting his
last days to literary work, said: ‘Depend upon it, when a man knows he
is going to be hanged in a few days, it concentrates his mind
wonderfully.’ I found this to be true. The learned doctor’s point is
subtle, and he no doubt was surprised that the concentration was not
entirely on that unpleasant event daily coming nearer. Such was my
difficulty. I had my human document to finish before a certain date,
and that date interfered very largely with my concentration of mind.
It had a way of dancing on to the page while I was writing, and of
floating, detached and apparent, before my eyes in the growing dusk.

My life began to grow more and more ghostly. My nerves suffered
considerably, although I endeavoured as far as possible to conceal the
fact from the two sordid figures who kept watch over me. I could not
help thinking of what a torture this fortnight or three weeks would
have been to anyone afflicted with a terror of death. Personally, I
felt the situation more as an offence against good taste than as an
offence against humanity. Let anyone reflect what it must mean to be
watched morning, noon, and night till the end comes, never to have one
moment for solitary reflection or sorrow, not to be able to render to
the soul the relief of despairing abandonment; to have the slightest
weakness witnessed by careful official eyes, staring with a weird
fascination through the long day which is all too short; to feel, in
addition, the horror of being caged and held like a wild beast in a
trap till the time comes to be led out to die. As I say, I am a
singular character, and these things were rather an irritation than an
agony. But I wonder that it does not drive the ordinary criminal mad.
The man who has slain his wife in a moment of insane jealousy—which
is, after all, viewed logically, an evidence of his love, a quality
which might still have been turned to good account—is tortured and
killed. It is a proceeding which reason condemns as mere barbaric
vengeance. Not, as I was saying, that I suffered these horrors. My
view of life was too objective for that. True, I had been given a body
with which to express myself, and I had done my best for that body,
but when that body was condemned to extinction I was able, as it were,
to remove myself from it, and view men and their ways from a distance.

The chaplain called on me, sometimes three times a day, and I enjoyed
his conversation very much. I led him from the crude vulgarities of
attempted conversion to discussions on minute questions of Christian
culture. I also dissected my sensations for his benefit. I told him
that the reality that the end was so near now and then flashed upon me
like an electric shock, and that this sensation was exceedingly
uncomfortable, which he said he could well believe. I was not, I told
him, afflicted with any very great terror of the mere function itself.
This he thought extraordinary, as I was an agnostic. I told him that I
thought it highly probable there was a hereafter, but that it was
quite possible that it might be so different from anything we could
imagine as to confuse our view of ethics, and that I might awake to
find myself greeted as a saint. He was a little shocked, and took the
joke as an admission of guilt, a point in which I was obliged to
correct him.

I think he was surprised when I involved him in a long discussion on
the moral aspect of capital punishment. Perhaps he went away and said
I was callous. This is the orthodox designation of a man who has
strength of mind or courage enough to meet a humanly-devised
punishment with indifference. The same quality used in a different
field will earn a reputation for valour. The dear chaplain was true to
his cloth, and evidently viewed the crime of an English peer with
something more of indulgence than he would have felt for the guilt of
a member of the lower classes. Indeed, his reiterations of ‘my lord’
in his religious discussions were so constant as to confuse me with
regard to the particular individual he was addressing.

I received a letter from Esther Lane in cryptic language which I could
not understand at the time, but which was to be fully revealed
afterwards.

I do not care to dwell upon the farewell interviews with my wife. They
were curiously and unexpectedly unpleasant. The Dowager Lady
Gascoyne—I allude, of course, to the widow of my benefactor—who,
strangely enough, had never had the least doubt of my innocence, also
came to see me. I think that in a sense the farewell that cost me most
was that from Grahame Hallward, the unobtrusive and consistent friend.
I do not think that the hopeless agony in his face could have been
more terrible had he been related to me by the nearest of blood ties.
He assured me that he would devote the rest of his life to proving my
innocence. Thus is the tragic often unconsciously allied to the
ridiculous.

My mind was fully occupied. The chaplain’s visits and those of people
who wished to say farewell, in addition to a great deal of time spent
with my lawyer, with whom I had to make many arrangements, took up all
the spare moments I did not devote to these memoirs. I should have
liked to know whether my child was a boy, although in either case it
would make no difference to the succession.

I was astonished to learn that there had been an extraordinary
revulsion of feeling in my favour. I thought that the facts were
really too plain to admit of an outburst of sentimentalism. I suppose
the idea of a peer dying a sordid death shocked the British public as
much as the idea of slaying a woman gently born had done some short
time before. Hanging was good enough for the ignorant and
poverty-stricken. The snobbery of the public is easier appealed to
than its humanity.

The usual petition which my lawyer had prepared was signed by all
sorts of unexpected people, even by some of those who had voted for my
guilt.

The Home Secretary could not, however, find any loophole for
interfering, and the Governor informed me of the date fixed, in a
curious phraseology which was no doubt meant to modify facts.

I was getting a little feverish, as was only natural. I found it
necessary to use some effort to brace myself up for the final ordeal.
Thoughts of Sibella haunted me, and played upon my memory like the
love motive on the lover’s brain in Berlioz’s Scarlet Symphony. She
was the allure beckoning my thoughts back to life, and it was a
strange confirmation of what I had always felt—viz., that she was my
strongest human magnet. I had not heard from her since the day of my
arrest, but two days before the end I received a letter. It gave me
infinite pleasure, and I knew it was the one thing I had been waiting
for. She did not know, she wrote, how she had managed in her agony to
conceal the truth from Lionel, but so far he had suspected nothing;
indeed, he was working night and day for me.

I became quite sentimental over this letter. My thoughts wandered back
to the schoolroom in the Hallwards’ house on Clapham Common. I saw
Sibella as a little school-girl with a host of boy admirers. I
remembered her as she was that afternoon we came home from football
and all had tea together. I remembered the kisses, beautiful and
perfumed as roses, which we had exchanged as children, and I
remembered the burning kiss, unexpected by both of us, exchanged that
Sunday evening when Grahame left us alone. These things returned to me
with the dull pain of melodies, associated with wild moments of joy,
heard again in moments of desolation, phantoms of music wailing past
in the haunted air.

Apart from the ineradicable desire to live, which is the chief vice of
human beings, I was not very anxious for my friends to obtain a
reprieve. In default of an absolute pardon, my reason taught me that
it would be better for them to fail. I did not relish the idea of
wearing out my life in chains. Thus, when the eve of the fatal day
arrived, I experienced a certain relief.

I retired to rest with an indifference which I saw impressed the only
audience I had left. I slept peacefully for several hours, but towards
morning I experienced a curious sensation of semi-giddiness, as if I
were being rocked in mid-air. The sensation grew more and more rapid,
till, suddenly, it seemed as if I were hurtling through space at a
terrific speed, as if worlds, stars, and atmosphere were revolving
round me at a rate indescribable to human intelligence.

It was as if I were in the engine-room of the universe, and as if the
ceaseless terror of its secrets whirled me hither and thither, like a
grain of sand. I was in the unlimited, unable to grasp time or space.
Then, by degrees, there came a calm; I lay still: and, almost
unconscious of having passed out of the sleeping state, I was awake,
with my eyes fixed on the Governor.

The cell was warm with sunlight, and it struck me at the time that
this was most unsuitable. As, half awake, I looked at the Governor, a
somewhat humorous idea struck me. I thought I was late for the
ceremony, and that he had come to bid me make haste. I sprang up with
a start, and I may have turned a little pale. It was excusable, I
think. I then saw that the room was full of people, and not the people
whom I had expected to see. The Governor seized my hand, and Grahame
Hallward sprang forward and grasped the other.

“Lord Gascoyne, your innocence has been established beyond question.
The real culprit has confessed.”

It sounded like a speech out of a melodrama. Luckily, I retained my
self-possession sufficiently to say something expressive of my thanks
to Providence. I think it met the occasion.

Who the real culprit could be I failed to understand.

“I have given instructions,” said the Governor, “for you to be taken
to a comfortable room till the actual order for your release arrives.”

Then I recollected my manuscript on the table. No one had seen it but
myself, but if it were noticed it would be awkward.

It was a terrible moment. I expected the Governor as I picked it up to
say: “Anything written in a prison becomes the property of the Crown,”
but I was allowed to walk off with it.

Escorted by a congratulatory group, I was taken to a room which was
quite luxurious. Grahame Hallward and myself breakfasted together.

Then he told me all about it.

“You remember the governess at Hammerton Castle?” he asked.

I nodded.

“Well, it is very sad for Lady Gascoyne, but it appears that Lord
Gascoyne had made love to her, that she was about to become a mother,
and that she poisoned his tea that evening as she had already poisoned
the wine. The servants remember now that she had been in the
dining-room. She intended at the time to kill herself as well, but she
had not the courage. Last night, however, she did so, having written
to your wife and to the Home Secretary, your lawyer, and others, so as
to make sure of the news arriving in time.”

I looked at him, striving to hide the sheer horror which I felt for
the first time in my life.

I was not surprised at the sacrifice, for it was the sort of gigantic
thing that a nature like Esther’s would have conceived and carried
out. Nevertheless, the news filled me with a profound gloom.

It was better, however, to be sitting there finishing my coffee and
smoking a cigarette than meandering out on to the unknown.

“Sibella has been awfully ill, Israel.”

“Did people think me guilty?” I asked.

He avoided my question, and said:

“The revulsion of feeling has been tremendous. Everybody will be
delighted.”

And so it turned out. People had not at all liked the idea of a real,
live lord becoming an unreal, dead lord by such means. The Home
Secretary sent the order for my release the same afternoon. The dead
Lord Gascoyne became a monster of iniquity, and I was congratulated by
everyone on the _dénouement_.

But to this day, there is a sadness in my wife’s manner, and although
she tries to hide a shuddering aversion for me when we are alone, it
shows itself unexpectedly in trifles. In some way she has grasped the
truth. Indeed, she must have done, for there can be no other
explanation of her conduct. We have two children, and perhaps there is
something pathetic in the amount of moral training she gives them. I
am sure there is no need for Hammerton to turn out other than well. I
have done the work. He has only to reap the benefit and the reward.
The second boy is a gentle little creature, Oriental in his nature,
and most devoted to his father, as they both are, but the second boy
especially so.

Sibella is still—Sibella.


The End



Transcriber’s Note

This transcription follows the text of the Chatto & Windus edition
published in 1907. Three unambiguous misspellings have been corrected
(namely, “Halward,” “memorist,” and “possiblity”), but any other
seeming errors have been left unchanged.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 73104 ***

